County governments have been fully co-opted in the fight against Covid-19 in a raft of new measures agreed upon in a meeting convened Wednesday by President Uhuru Kenyatta at State House. The measures which are aimed at safeguarding Kenyans against the adverse health and socioeconomic impacts of the coronavirus include the attainment of a national 30,500 isolation bed capacity within one month. The third extra-ordinary session of the national and county governments co-ordination summit set the target of 300 isolation beds for each county so as to deal with the rising cases of infections, currently in 35 of the country's 47 counties. In addition to raising the isolation bed capacity, the meeting which was also attended by Deputy President William Ruto, tasked county governments to review their fiscal and strategic plans for the 2020/2021 financial year to include Covid-19 prevention and control measures. To address the growing public pressure to reopen places of worship, the summit agreed to involve the Council of Governors in the ongoing consultations being undertaken by an inter-faith council. So as to ensure the smooth reopening of schools and other institutions of learning, the summit also agreed to involve the governors in the ongoing education sector stakeholder consultations. The education consultations will lead to the issuance of a new school calendar in line with the recent presidential directive to reopen schools in September. To keep track of the resolutions, the summit resolved to reconvene on Wednesday next week to among other matters, review guidelines for the gradual reopening of the economy, containment measures currently in place, and protocols for the progressive reopening of places of worship. President Kenyatta urged the two levels of government to work closely so as to find proper solutions to the Covid-19 economic and health crisis. The President said the framers of the 2010 Constitution understood the desire for Kenyans to have proper and well-equipped health services closer to them and that’s why they decided to devolve healthcare. However, the Head of State pointed out that the same drafters of the Constitution were aware that as a country, in times of crisis, the two levels of government would need to sit down and come up with solutions for emergencies such as the Covid-19 pandemic. “When this summit sits, its only business is Kenya. No party affiliations; no political distancing; and no ethnic divisions. The summit becomes the soul of Kenya. That is why the pronouncements of this gathering, whenever we meet, become articles of our faith in ‘Project Kenya’,” President Kenyatta said. He said the Covid-19 health crisis offers the best opportunity for the improvement of healthcare in the country. Health Cabinet Secretary Mutahi Kagwe applauded governors for working closely with his ministry in the fight against Covid-19, saying cooperation is key in ensuring the country succeeds in dealing with the health crisis. Mr Kagwe urged the county chiefs to emulate Machakos County which, he said, has commissioned jua kali artisans to fabricate Covid-19 isolation beds. Treasury CS Ukur Yattani said his ministry was in the process of assessing the impact of the Covid-19 crisis on the economy. In his technical briefing, acting Director General of Health Dr Patrick Amoth said community preparedness is crucial in defeating Covid-19. COG chairman and Kakamega Governor Wycliff Oparanya said the counties are well prepared.