Budding rhumba artiste Papa Lando (Ephantus Lando) has come up with a new genre where he fuses Kenyan beats with the Congolese rhumba. Speaking to Nation recently, the 37-year-old musician said that despite having been kept off live performances due to the Covid-19 pandemic, he has kept up his tempo with rhumba music rehearsals online. He has adopted a distinctive style of music that features urban rhumba fused with Kiswahili and Lingala (KiswaNgala). NEW STYLE He has been encouraging other artistes to adopt the new music style. “I grew up listening to rhumba courtesy of my father who had a large collection of rhumba and Benga music,” he says. Some of the collections his father kept ranged from legendary Congolese musicians Franco Luambo Makiadi, Tabu Ley Rochereau, Tanzanians Simba Wanyika, Mbaraka Mwinshehe, Benga icon DO Owino Misiani among others. On the international scene, Lando got inspired by Congolese rhumba stars like Koffi Olomide, Ferre Gola and Lokua Kanza. Locally, he has been inspired by musicians like Eric Wanaina, Sauti Sol and Kidum. The singer, who is also a guitarist and keyboard player, studied music both in his O-level and college. Back in school, he won awards in various music competitions and festivals. “One of my greatest source of inspiration in music during the early days was participating in school choir which gave me the opportunity to travel across the country,” he said. NEW ALBUM After a completing school, it was an almost 10-year break before Lando made a return to what is proving to be an enterprising new dawn in music. He is currently working on a new album “Mbogi Ya Rhumba” that features the new single ‘Sitaki Kua Your Ex” and ‘Pesa Ni Maua’. The album features the renowned Genge artists: Gabu of P-Unit.:  He also released “Poso Bolingo” (featuring Barcelone) which is too available on YouTube. Notably on “Poso Bolingo” Lando was able to blend Lingala and Swahili lyrics played in rhumba beats. As for “Pesa ni Maua” Lando says is an inspiration from the legendary Simba Wanyika hit song “Shilingi yaua tena ni maua”. “I chose to release the song which has words of advice to couples to be wary of the influence of money in relationships,” he said. Papa Lando, who is also an event coordinator and businessman, plans to launch the “Mbogi ya Rhumba” album in December. He is optimistic that by then, restrictions on public performances due to the Covid-19 pandemic will have relaxed. He hopes to incorporate both Kenyan and foreign artistes during the launch of the album. His fans can contact him via Instagram: papalndo254, YouTube: papa lando, Facebook: Papa Lando, Tiktok: papalando254 and Twitter: @papalando254.