Former Harambee Stars midfielder Peter Opiyo says he is looking forward to what could be his swansong season in the Kenyan Premier League. The veteran footballer, nicknamed Pinchez thanks to his ball-winning skills at the centre of the football pitch, has also talked up his retirement plans in an interview with Nation Sport, suggesting he's trained his sights on farming, coaching and becoming a player agent. Opiyo penned an 18-month contract with second-tier side Nairobi City Stars in January and has been instrumental in helping the Kawangware-based team secure promotion to the Kenyan Premier League. Stars were automatically promoted when the second-tier football league ended prematurely in March owing to the coronavirus pandemic outbreak. At the time, Opiyo's club was leading the 20-team standings with 43 points from 18 matches, seven points more than second-placed Bidco United which was also promoted. "Joining City Stars was a very easy decision to make. I loved the vision of the President (Jonathan Jackson). We have not achieved this (promotion to premier league) by fluke. Our team consists of a talented squad, hard-working coach supportive management, and some passionate fan base. With this, we stand a chance of competing in the Kenyan Premier League and causing some upset," he explained. Prior to signing for coach Sanjic Alagic's Stars, the ex-AFC Leopards and Gor Mahia enjoyed spells in Oman at Al Shabaab FC, twice at FF Jaro (in Finland), Al Markhiya (Qatar) and with Turkmenistan champions Altyn Asyr. "Football in Europe is very different compared to Asia and Africa. Europe is far much ahead, and the quality of the game is really high. Most teams play a very fast passing game and the infrastructure is top-notch. The Asians are slowing catching up but African administrators are laffing begind and have a lot to do." Even though he is yet to announce his retirement, Opiyo, the elder sibling of enterprising keeper Levis Opiyo hints that he has already planned for that moment; "I practice farming. I would wish to be a football agent and use my contacts to help expose talents. I have also thought of working as a physical trainer." Opiyo says his career highlights include winning the 2013 Cecafa Senior Challenge Cup. His low moments are missing opportunities at German side Fortuna Dusseldorf in 2009 and South African sides Maritzburg United, Supersport, and Vasco da Gama.