Kabarak is among the three private universities that achieved a 100 per cent placement in government-sponsored programmes. In total, private universities were allocated more than 26,000 students. Kabarak University, which has 29 programmes, was allocated 2,327 students. This is the second highest compared to the previous year’s allocation which was 2,257. Kabarak University Vice-Chancellor Prof Henry Kiplangat welcomed the increased number of students at the institution. “This is clear demonstration that Kenya Universities and Colleges and Central Placement Services has a lot of confidence in our facilities and teaching staff,” said Prof Henry Kiplangat. Some of the courses at the university, which is the brainchild of former President Daniel arap Moi, include Bachelor of Science in Tourism and Hospitality, Bachelor of Science in Economics and Statistics, Bachelor of Procurement and Logistics Management, Bachelor of Science in Economics and Finance and Bachelor of Science in Actuarial Science. The department of Computer Science  landed a Sh18.5 million research grant from the national Research Fund early this year. Early this year, Dr Moses Thiga, the Director of Research, Innovation and Outreach landed a Sh18.5 million research grant from the national Research Fund. The department’s two courses – Bachelor of Science in Computer Science and Bachelor of Computer Science and Forensics attracted more than 100 per cent applicants. “This is one the departments that has put Kabarak University at the national and international map. When it comes to Computer Science studies, Kabarak University is the institution to beat in Kenya,” said Prof Kiplangat. Surprisingly, Bachelor of Science in Economics did not attract a single student. Mount Kenya University was allocated the highest number of students with a placement of 4,400 students. The other private universities which had a 100 per cent placement of students include KCA (2,062), Riara (1,667) and Daystar (337). Interestingly, not a single public university managed to get a 100 per cent placement. Since the programme was started in 2016, private universities have attracted more students.