The 2019/20 Bundesliga season will come to an end Saturday after a successful return amid the coronavirus pandemic that saw football leagues suspended across the world. Bundesliga was the first league to resume and so far major leagues like the Premier League, La Liga and Serie A have restarted behind closed doors. Fans around the world have cheered the players virtually something very new to the sporting world. Ordinarily, federations can punish clubs by forcing them to play in empty stadia due to indiscipline but the recent absence of fans was brought about by WHO (World Health Organization) as part of precautionary measures to curb the spread of the pandemic. This Saturday, NTV courtesy of StarTimes will air the match between Eintracht  Frankfurt and SC Paderborn at 4:30pm live from the Commerzbank Arena. Frankfurt, who settled for a 1-1 draw against Koln last time out, will be looking to end their Bundesliga campaign on a high when they host already-relegated Paderborn who suffered a 3-1 defeat to Champions League-chasing Borussia Monchengladbach in Round 33. The last time these two sides met on December 22 last year, Paderborn won 2-1. In other matches on Saturday, champions Bayern Munich visit Wolfsburg who are chasing a Europa League slot. Borussia Monchengladbach host Hertha Berlin looking for a win to consolidate a Champions League slot while RB Leipzig need only a draw away to Augsburg to be sure of a top four finish. Bayer Leverkusen will be looking to bounce back against Mainz with a win and hope both Monchengladbach and Leipzig lose to qualify for the lucrative Champions League. Bundesliga will start the 2020/21 season on August 21, though it's not clearly known if fans will be allowed to attend the matches. The German Football Association (DFB) has stated clearly that players and fans safety will be prioritized. FIXTURES (all games kick-off at 1630 EAT) Augsburg v RB Leipzig Borussia Monchengladbach v Hertha Berlin Bayer Leverkusen v Mainz Borussia Dortmund v Hoffenheim Eintracht Frankfurt v Paderborn Freiburg v Schalke Union Berlin v Dusseldorf Werder Bremen v FC Koln Wolfsburg v Bayern Munich