The government now has comprehensive data on educational institutions in the county, from early childhood centres to university, Education Cabinet Secretary George Magoha announced Thursday. He said the details were compiled by a task force on curriculum reforms chaired by Kenyatta University Deputy Vice-Chancellor Fatuma Chege. It was an achievement worth celebrating, he added. “All the details of pre-primary to university level institutions can now be accessed from a database at the click of a button,” the CS said while briefing journalists on the progress of the task force’s work at the Centre for Mathematics, Science and Technology Education in Africa (Cemastea) in Nairobi. Other centres where the exercise that began in April 2020  was conducted were the Kenya Institute for Curriculum Development and the Kenya Education Management Institute, Nairobi. Prof Magoha thanked the task force for a professional job, which ensured high levels of accuracy, validity and reliability. “Over the period of its work, the task force lived up to the ministry’s promise that we will implement the Competency-Based Curriculum in the most consultative manner that ensures all stakeholders’ views are considered,” the CS said. The task force interviewed all education stakeholders countrywide using electronic platforms to achieve the feat because of Covid-19 pandemic, which limited travel and physical contact, Prof Magoha added. “The qualitative data generated from this stakeholder engagement was audio-recorded, transcribed and analysed alongside the quantitative validation data. Further, stakeholder engagement was conducted through submissions to the task force, both written and oral. “These stakeholders included parents, teachers’ unions, headteachers’ and principals’ associations, private educational providers, tertiary institutions and universities, government agencies and departments, NGOs, faith-based organisations, civil society,  the council of governors, political leaders and scholars from various backgrounds,” Prof Magoha said. He disclosed that the task force would step up the processing of various aspects of the curriculum implementation in order to validate the information so far received and analysed from secondary sources. “This data will be useful in monitoring the progress of CBC implementation, which was rolled out in Grade Four in 2020, to allow for any necessary interventions,” the CS said. The task force was ready to prepare its final report with proposals on effective CBC implementation beyond Grade Four, Prof Magoha said, adding, he will make public recommendations of the final report.