President Uhuru Kenyatta has summoned of Jubilee Party legislators for a National Assembly parliamentary group meeting slated for Monday. According to a text message sent to the MPs, the meeting will take place at the Kenyatta International Convention Centre (KICC) from 9am. Even though the agenda of the meeting remains unclear, Jubilee Party Deputy Secretary-General Caleb Kositany told the Nation that the agenda is “obviously” to remove those perceived to be allies of Deputy President William Ruto. "Nowadays what the party does is to remove people and replace them with non-performers and Monday's meeting is not an exception. Most likely the Majority Leader Aden Duale might be shown the door," said the Soy MP, who is also the DP's de-facto spokesman. PLANNED REMOVAL The lawmaker said that he is aware of plans to remove him from his current party position but added that he cannot be intimidated and will continue with the court battle until the changes effected in the Jubilee Party are done in accordance with the law. "Plans to remove must be there because I have been against boardroom takeovers and they want to stifle democracy but I am awaiting to be called to a disciplinary committee. We believe that justice will be served and all those illegalities will be rewritten," said Mr Kositany. Cherang'any MP Joshua Kutuny, an ally of the President, said the Head of State failed to name the Leader of Majority in the last PG at State House and promised to convene another meeting after three weeks. "The President was categorical last time that he will call us after three weeks because he failed to name Majority Leader and that is what we expect on Monday including the fate of signatures we collected and submitted to him," said Mr Kutuny. He added that with Wiper and Chama Cha Mashinani (CCM) signing a cooperation agreement with the ruling party, it is anticipated that the President will brief them on the way forward. JUBILEE ASILI According to Mr Kutuny, the DP’s coming up with a command centre with the name Jubilee Asili, is among things which continue to escalate tension in the party. He termed the move by Mr Ruto as “disrespect” to the party leader. "The bone of contention is this other outfit which was formed the other day. They are going against the rules and undermining the President," he said. On Thursday, the DP appeared to unveil what some see as his command centre for the 2022 presidential election – the Jubilee Asili Centre – after a “lunch” meeting with legislators allied to him. Mr Ruto exuded the confidence of a man ready to fight back, amid a continuing siege of his allies in the Parliament. Speculations are rife on social media that he has been cornered and is hence forming another party.