One metre or three feet, that is the minimum amount of distance the World Health Organization (WHO) recommends you keep between you and others while in public spaces to avoid the spread and contraction of the Covid-19. Observing this guideline is evidently going to stay with us for a while as the new normal sinks in. How you measure that distance in the real world however, might be harder than it seems. Luckily, technology is fixing that. MEET SODAR Tech giant Google has come up with a solution in the form of an augmented reality tool called Sodar. According to the company, Sodar “uses WebXR to visualise 2m social distancing guidelines in your environment” by creating an augmented reality two metre radius around you on android smartphones. The free touse tool developed under Experiments with Google uses your phone’s Chrome browser to initiate the visualisation of the environment around you using Augmented Reality (AR). To try it out, open goo.gle/sodar on your chrome browser and hit ‘launch’ to get started. A dialogue box will pop up asking you to ‘Enter AR’. At this point, your device might ask you to install the Google Play Services for AR, if it has not been installed already. Once done, press ‘Enter AR’ to launch Sodar. The tool will then ask you to point your phone down and move it around to find the ground, and that is all. You should be able to see a circle superimposed around you, indicating the two metre radius and by extension whether you are in breach of the guidelines. With this tool, Google is definitely offering a solution to the questions of how to properly observe social distancing amid the coronavirus pandemic. It may still be an experiment but it works quite well. On the downside however, you can only access the tool on an android enabled smartphone. INTERESTING INNOVATION Another interesting innovation coined out of the coronavirus pandemic to aid in social distancing is Singapore’s robotic dog. That’s right, the Southeast Asian country Singapore used a robot dog to ensure that park users at the city’s Bishan-Ang Mo Kio Park stayed at least one metre apart from each other. The robot dubbed ‘spot’ was designed by Boston Dynamics, an engineering and robotics company based in Massachusetts. The ‘dog’ which was patrolling the park on a two-week trial basis came equipped with cameras and sensors to enable  it detect the  number of people in an area and played a pre-recorded message asking them to observe social distancing guidelines. Over in Belgium, a company called Robit has created a bracelet dubbed the Romware Covid Radius which helps employees in a workplace effectively observe social distancing guidelines by vibrating and displaying a visual warning whenever they get close to each other. According to the company, the bracelet also comes in handy when doing contact tracing by identifying those who have come in contact with a newly identified Covid-19 patient in the workforce.  Another solution for ensuring social distancing in the workplace is being offered by a Netherlands based company called the Smart Eagle. The company has developed a ceiling-mounted sensor that monitors the number of individuals in a room and how far apart they are from each other. If distancing guidelines are breached, the Smart Eagle sensor sends alerts to the facility managers for action. As we continue fighting this coronavirus pandemic, technological inventions and innovations will certainly keep being rolled out to make us cope better.  