One, in the welter of the messy dispute with an attempt to replace Mr Moses Wetang'ula as party leader of Ford Kenya Party, a crucial fact has been obscured: What do coup plotters Wafula Wamunyinyi, who was supposed to be interim chairman, and Eseli Simiyu, the able Secretary General, want to do with the party? As Dr Eseli acknowledged, the party that became the Official Opposition in 1993 upon the return of political pluralism, the party of the nationalist Jaramogi Oginga Odinga, is a pale shell of its former self. Ford-K, he said, has not run a presidential candidate in three elections. Two, Mr Musalia Mudavadi, who boasts more experience in cabinet than President Kenyatta, Deputy President William Ruto or Mr Raila Odinga, has not extended this knowledge to growing his Amani National Congress. He is yet to hold polls, but is reaching out extensively to would-be allies. Mr Mudavadi, Mr Wetang'ula, Mr Odinga and Mr Kalonzo Musyoka teamed up in the National Super Alliance (Nasa) whose sole objective was to seize Executive power in the 2017 General Election. Nasa was Mr Mudavadi's brainchild, but current alignments appear not to stir, or appeal to him. Three, Mr Musyoka, once again, took his Wiper Democratic Movement into a cooperation pact, this time with the governing Jubilee Party. He was following Baringo Senator Gideon Moi whose miserably diminished Kanu last month signed a cooperation deal with Jubilee. In 2018, Mr Musyoka, catching up with Mr Odinga, lent his unqualified support to the pact (Handshake) between the Orange Democratic Movement leader and President Kenyatta. Mr Musyoka famously declared his willingness to be the President's errand boy. Four, it is expected that ODM too will enter a pact with Jubilee. Evidently, Kenya's second largest party by parliamentary representation is no longer an opposition outfit. As it awaits government jobs, it is psychologically in government, residually in opposition and physically in no man's land. Mr Odinga, thanks to Handshake, is the unelected powerhouse, President's confidant, and de facto Number Two. In his latest act, he received an MP decamping from Dr Ruto's faction in Jubilee, but not to ODM. He has blurred the difference between Jubilee and ODM. And that's the state of Kenya's big four of the more than 60 registered parties. Ford-K, while unable to discern where Weta is leading it, Wamunyinyiis attempting to take charge without such a blueprint. Equally, safe pair of hands and alliance-builder Mudavadi, has no blueprint to power yet. Camp followers Musyoka and Wiper have been tossed about by the currents of the Handshake. They have no path to power. Unsurprisingly, President Kenyatta, who retires in 2022 and Mr Odinga, who seeks to succeed him, as comrades-in-arms, lead the rest by the nose. Since Mr Odinga sees no evil and hears no evil, he speaks no evil. So holding the government to account, is no longer up his street. Therefore, all things being equal, in 2022, Jubilee's feet will not be held to the fire for its failure to deliver on its promises. Indeed, there may be no Jubilee. And parties have failed another test. They should, locally and nationally, meet the rank and file at annual caucuses, when major events happen, and before every General Election. A party's strength is measured by its membership and the closeness of the membership to the leadership, principles and values by which it stands and which shape its local and national aspirations. No single party has held a membership drive. A party changes its values, attunes and aligns them to the local and global climate. This is always done with a view to seizing and using opportunities to take power with the objective of improving the lives of the citizenry. Party rank and file, regional and national leadership, get close, know their rules, values and aims through regular interaction and review of local and global events. But the goal is always to position union and membership for power. The third test all parties have failed is holding internal elections. As the monolith that is Jubilee was formed in 2016, all the 13 parties that merged were promised polls soon. Soon is yet to come and the office bearers remain interim and handpicked individuals. Ditto ODM whose 2014 national poll was disrupted by goons keen to avert the imminent defeat of the favoured team. The parties are neither people centred nor respecters of internal democracy. Let them put their houses in order before they talk about change. The political arena sorely needs new ideas. kwendo58@gmail.com