RATES WAIVER: To help alleviate the Covid-19 pandemic suffering, Wanjiru Thiong’o is proposing that Nairobi City County consider granting a waiver of interest and penalties to rate defaulters, “which it has not given for several years”. Property owners, Wanjiru adds, have been grappling with poor infrastructure and drainage, acute water shortages and woeful waste management, among other challenges. “Rental property has suffered loss of income due to defaults and many are now unable to service their mortgages and construction loans. They’re also expected to pay a whopping Sh10,000 for a clearance certificate that is valid for only three months.” Her contact is wthiongo474@gmail.com.  ***  POOR ROADS: The poor condition of roads in his rural home in Kirimukuyu Ward of Mathira Constituency in Nyeri County, says Eutychus Mutahi, who, incidentally, is kind of a namesake of Governor Mutahi Kahiga’s, has been troubling him. Routine maintenance by the Kenya Rural Roads Authority (Kerra) has been neglected. Kerra, he recalls, used to hire youths to unblock drains twice a year and clear bushes. “Most areas have become inaccessible, especially in the rainy season, while some roads have been reduced to footpaths by bushes.” His contact is eutychusmutahi@gmail.com.  ***  POTHOLE CAPITAL: Following recent heavy rains in central Kenya, Richard Kamami reports, the users of the Thika-Mang’u road have had to contend with huge car repair costs due to the potholes in the Ngoingwa area. The place, adds Richard, has also witnessed some nasty road accidents, and many more are likely to happen, as motorists swerve to avoid smashing into these deep potholes. He is, therefore, appealing to the Kenya Urban Roads Authority to come to his and his neighbours’ rescue and help to prevent accidents. Alternatively, youth should be engaged to sort out the mess through the Kazi Mtaani initiative, he pleads. His contact is richard.kamami@gmail.com.  ***  MASK IN CAR: While the Covid-19 pandemic has made the lives of Kenyans miserable, Munir Noorani is disappointed that the police are worsening the situation by needlessly harassing the people. Munir would like the Health ministry to clarify whether it’s mandatory to put on a mask while in a family car and how many people should be carried, as police officers have been preying on motorists for bribes. “There is too much extortion going on and it’s quite frustrating.” The ministry should urgently, at its daily updates on the virus, address this matter, he says. His contact is noormunir62@yahoo.com.  ***  CALLING MATIANG’I: Also unhappy about the sorry state of roads is Annah Oruta, a resident of Syokimau, in Machakos County, right on Nairobi’s eastern outskirts. She is particularly incensed about the pathetic condition of the 4.5km stretch of Community Road to Mombasa Road and wishes that the no-nonsense Interior Cabinet Secretary Fred Matiang’i could pay one of the capital city’s ‘bedrooms’ a visit. This short distance, she adds, has become a nightmare for motorists. According to her, it’s under the national government; hence her appeal to “super CS Matiang’i” to take action and ease the people’s suffering. Her contact is aoruta@gmail.com.  ***  GONE WITH M-PESA: Something is terribly wrong with M-Pesa mobile money transfer’s reversal system, laments John Kivuva. After his wife inadvertently sent money to the wrong person, she immediately forwarded the acknowledgement message to short code 456 in a bid to reverse transfer. She then got the response that the money would be returned in two hours. But later, she was informed that the undeserving recipient had withdrawn it. “Why have a reversal system that does not work?” asks John, who suspects collusion between staff and the recipient. His contact is johnkivuva8@gmail.com.   Have an effective day, won’t you!