Kericho Green Stadium stands out as the only sports facility in which the county government has laid out a proper running track that meets the standards set by World Athletics. Laying of an artificial athletics track inside the stadium, funded by Kericho County government to the tune of Sh37 million, is in its final stages. The contractor is expected to hand over the facility later this month. “The county government has used Sh37 million to lay the artificial running track which has eight lanes and one for use by those officiating various competitions,” said Governor Paul Chepkwony. Professor Chepkwony, who is also the chairman of Youth, Gender, and Sports Committee of the Council of Governors, has said that due to its high quality, the artificial track will be utilised for the next 15 years before it is replaced. “Laying of the artificial running track at the stadium was one of the key planks of my manifesto to promote sporting talents in the county which, unbeknown to many, is home to many world champions in athletics,” Chepkwony told Nation Sport Monday. Once complete, the stadium is expected to hold more than 40,000 people up from the current 5,000 as more terraces will be constructed as part of work to upgrade the stadium. “It is not by default that we hosted the 2019 Kenya Inter-Counties Sports and Cultural Association (Kicosca) Games. in August last year after going through a tedious competitive process. Once laying of the artificial track is complete, we will be ready to hold regional and international track competitions,” said Chepkwony. Deputy President William Ruto presided over the opening ceremony of Kicosca Games in Kericho. The games were closed by Council of Governors Chairman Wycliff Oparanya. Chepkwony has also revealed that Kericho Green Stadium is in the process of being renamed ‘Kiprugut Chumo Stadium’ once Kericho County Assembly and other leaders in the region have given the nod. Kericho County Chief Officer in charge of Sports, Anthony Koskei, said renovation of the stadium has been ongoing for the last three months. “Initially, we expected the contractor to complete renovation and to hand over the project within 45 days but heavy rains interfered with that,” said Koskei as he took us around the stadium. A football pitch stands at the centre of the stadium. The renovation work was done in consultation with Football Kenya Federation officials, as well as a team from Athletics Kenya. Other than athletes preparing for international races, various football clubs use the stadium. They are Kenyan Premier League club Kericho Zoo FC, lower-tier league clubs Sosiot FC, Kaborok FC, Matrix FC, and Silibwet FC. Bomet Administration Police FC from the neighbouring Bomet County also use the stadium. “The maroon track and the white marks which we chose are quiet popular with indoor games,” said Ms Edna Ruto, the County Executive in charge of Sports. The main dais will be upgraded to make it secure, and to facilitate ease of movement between  VIPs attending matches, players and spectators. The devolved government unit has also initiated a programme to specifically support sportswomen. Kericho Green Stadium has a rich history. In the 1980s, Kericho All stars FC, Kimugu FC and various clubs sponsored by the multinational tea companies, including Brooke Bond (now Unilever Tea Kenya) and James Finlays, used to hold competitions and training sessions at the stadium. Apart from the legendary Chumo, other athletes who have honed their skills at Kericho Green Stadium include Japheth Kipkurgat, Mercy Cherono, Lydia Chepkirui, Ferguson Rotich among others. Athletes from Lemotit and Kericho athletics camps also train at the stadium from time to time.