Reigning Kenyan Premier League (KPL) champions Gor Mahia have received a shot in the arm with injured defenders Shafik Batambuze and Philemon Otieno nearing full recovery and imminent return to action. The two have been nursing serious knee injuries, which needed reconstructive surgeries – that was done and they started rehabilitation and physiotherapy. They now say they are getting better and looking forward to getting back to action next season. “My recovery is getting better daily. I have been following the physio programme - I started training moving up the ladder and by next month, it’s my hope and prayer that l will be in good shape,” Batambuze is quoted as saying by the club portal. “It’s been a bit tough - not easy for sure to be in this state as a footballer but thanks to my family, friends, and all those who have been there for me because they have been so supportive in my recovery journey. With their good support, I have managed to get this far. “With the good and steady progress l have had in the recovery process, by next month l will be engaging in full training and that means, if football is to resume by July, l will be able to join my team-mates. Let’s see how it goes," he added. Otieno, who suffered a knee injury while on a national duty playing for Harambee Stars in the return leg tie of the African Nations Championship (Chan) qualifier against Tanzania in August, was offered a one-year extension deal by the club while still injured, something he is really grateful for. “I am grateful to the Gor Mahia management for showing trust in me and giving me a chance to revive my career. My contract was running out, but they considered my situation and offered me a new deal,” he said. “This was a great decision for me because it will be easier for me to regain my form in a familiar environment. These are people I have known for a while and we understand each other better. “This injury has been the toughest period ever in my career. It was challenging. I was drained financially, physically and mentally, but I’m grateful I overcame the situation. My body has been responding well since I resumed training in February. I can’t wait to get back to action again,” he added. Gor Mahia will represent Kenya once again in the Caf Champions League and the return of the duo is a sure boost as they add the much needed experience and talent to boost the chances of the club progressing further.