The Kakamega County government has set up a Covid-19 testing centre at the County General Hospital at a cost of Sh19.5 million. County Chief Officer for Health Services Beatrice Etemesi said the facility has two equipment with a capacity to test 16 samples each on an eight-hour shift. Dr Etemesi said the testing kits have been approved by the US Food Drug Administration (FDA).  “If tests are few, one equipment can test Covid-19 while the other can continue with TB tests. In event of high Covid-19 tests, then TB tests can be channelled to the facility at the Malava Sub-County Hospital,” said Dr Etemesi. The facility will enable medical officers from the region to test patients suspected of being infected with the coronavirus and admit them for treatment. REAGENTS In the last three months, samples obtained from patients were being sent to the Kenya Medical Research Institute (Kemri) laboratory in Kisumu for testing and it took up to two days for results to be made available. But the shortage of reagents needed to facilitate tests could disrupt operations. In Busia County, a similar testing centre is carrying limited tests due to a shortage of reagents while the bulk of the samples are sent to the Kemri laboratory in Kisumu or to the Moi Teaching and Referral Hospital in Eldoret. The Busia Health Executive Isaac Omeri said the county government had upgraded the testing equipment at the County General Hospital for Covid-19 testing but had been forced to scale down the tests due to a shortage of reagents.  “We are currently carrying out very limited tests for Covid-19 due to the shortage of reagents. We are still relying on Kemri laboratories in Kisumu and MTRH in Eldoret for testing of the samples,” said Dr Omeri. MET REQUIREMENTS In Kakamega, Health Services Executive Rachael Okumu said the county has met all the requirements for a Covid-19 testing centre in the region. “We are waiting for an approval from the Ministry of Health to start carrying out the tests at the hospital. We have set up the testing centre and it will be up and running in the next few days,” said Ms Okumu. She said the county is expected to roll out testing for the coronavirus in the region after a consignment of reagents from the national governments arrives. "We have the equipment at the laboratory for testing Covid-19. What we are lacking are the reagents needed for the tests. We are expecting the Ministry of Health to inspect and approve the facility in the next few days,” said Ms Okumu. She added that four hospitals in the county will be used for treatment of Covid-19 patients.  "Mumias Sub-County Hospital has a 100-bed capacity, Likuyani Sub-County Hospital has 24 beds and the County General Hospital has 28 beds for Covid-19 cases. The new teaching and referral hospital will also be used," said Ms Okumu.The county official said each hospital will have at least one ventilator.