Embattled Ford Kenya party leader Moses Wetang’ula has claimed that there is a deliberate effort to topple leaders of political parties who have refused to sing a particular tune ahead of the 2022 elections. According to the Bungoma senator, the move is aimed at creating a chain of leaders of political parties who do not question or say anything — ceremonial figureheads. In an exclusive interview with the Nation, Mr Wetang’ula said the turbulence currently going on in Ford Kenya, the storm that Jubilee Party is undergoing and the vicious fight for the secretary-general post that ANC had are not ordinary events,  but meant to destabilise parties. “Some parties suffer from the big man syndrome and members have no breathing space. There are parties that want to dominate the political scene, so they want to identify some leaders whom they see as an impediment to their course and erect a stooge so they can meet their political end,” Mr Wetang’ula said. ELECTION OF STOOGES “The election of stooges to lead parties is very simple in order to have a chain of ‘yes men’ who see nothing and say nothing except what they are told to see and say,” Mr Wetang’ula said. Pressed to name those who are interfering with other parties, Mr Wetang’ula said it is out there for everyone to see them: “I leave that one to you.” ANC is also facing another battle after one of its members on Thursday last week petitioned the Registrar of Political Parties Anne Nderitu to declare vacancies in its National Executive Council and all other party organs. “This plane of instability has been in this country for a while now at different levels with different intensity, and the future of democracy lies with the fact that the structures set up to protect institutions must properly and independently function,” Mr Wetang’ula added. The immediate Senate minority leader also waded into the current standoff between the Judiciary and the Executive over the appointment of 41 Court of Appeal judges, saying the situation is not good for the country, and the impasse should be solved amicably and speedily. SYMBOL OF UNITY “I am a senior lawyer and therefore find it completely unnecessary for such an exchange. The Attorney General has also weighed in making the water even murkier,” Mr Wetang’ula added. He urged the two to move with speed and solve the issue and come together to show a symbol of unity. “The Chief Justice talking to the President does not in any way compromise the independence of the Judiciary,” he said. On the existence of Nasa, Mr Wetang’ula said even with the cooperation agreement signed between Wiper Party and Chama Cha Mashinani, Nasa still exists and has its own sunset clause, which is five years as per the coalition agreement. “Nasa does not need anyone to kill it. It will automatically come to its sunset. One of the reasons our brothers in ODM say Nasa is dead is to avoid responsibility to its partners. We all put votes in one person — our presidential candidate Raila Odinga,” Mr Wetang’ula said “We came into Nasa as a coalition of the willing. It was crafted by Mudavadi (Musalia). It will be very unwise to kill his own baby. I embrace Nasa with my members,” he added DISDAIN Mr Wetang’ula accused ODM of using the coalition outfit to its advantage and treating other partners with disdain “Sometimes I get amused. When it is convenient for them, ODM says Nasa is dead. When they want to de-whip members from committees but when we ask for the cake, they say Nasa doesn’t exist. So I will leave it to your conclusion.” On the impending referendum, Mr Wetang’ula said it is an imperative decision that no one can resist. “Even when we were campaigning for the Constitution, we agreed that part of it needs to be changed and the moment is now,” said the senator. He also said he supports the BBI report contrary to reports that he is against it. On the turmoil that has visited his party, Mr Wetang’ula accused Cotu Secretary-General Francis Atwoli, Devolution Cabinet Secretary Eugene Wamalwa and Bungoma Governor Wycliffe Wangamati of interfering with its activities.