A court in Isiolo jailed for life a 68-year-old man for defiling a girl two years ago. Gerald Murungi, a cobbler, was found guilty of having carnal knowledge with the 10-year-old girl contrary to the Sexual Offences Act. The court heard that the minor was defiled on multiple occasions inside Murungi’s house on diverse dates between June 8 and June 13, 2018. The girl, in her testimony in court, said the elderly man lured her into his house while she was playing. While in his house, the girl said, Murungi requested her to wash his clothes but she declined. The accused then ordered her to sit on his bed, undressed her and defiled her as  he covered her mouth. “After I refused to wash his clothes, he locked the door and ordered me to sit on his bed, undressed and defiled me for the entire night,” the minor told the court. The minor further said Murungi defiled her the following morning then locked her up in the house and left for work. “The man molested her again in the evening before allowing her to leave for home the following morning. He was arrested after the girl reported the incident to her uncle who notified police. A medical report submitted in court revealed that the girl was defiled. Murungi denied the charges and argued that he had been framed up by the minor’s family. The court termed his arguments as mere lies. The suspect pleaded for leniency asking the court to consider that he had been in remand for three years and that he had health complications. “I ask the court to consider that I am old and I have children who rely on me, I have hearing difficulties and urinary issues,” Murungi pleaded. ruled out the issue of mistaken identity noting the girl confirmed to know the suspect as a cobbler and during the three days, she had ample time to identify, familiarize and recognize him. While delivering the judgment via zoom, Isiolo Principal Magistrate Evanson Ngigi found the man guilty of defilement. He said defiling the girl was cruel, inhumane and betrayal of trust that the society bestows upon the suspect as a senior citizen to provide moral and physical protection to such young children. "The case calls for deterrence sentence to prevent such predatory vices against young and vulnerable girls," he said.