There was drama at Nkubu Police Station Meru County after two suspected livestock thieves surrendered to escape a lynch mob that was pursuing them Saturday night. The two, a man and a woman, engaged the residents of Kieni Kia Ndege in a 20-kilometre chase before they took refuge at the police station’s cells at around 1.30am. Three other accomplices believed to be part of a gang that has been stealing livestock in Meru County escaped on foot. Narrating the incident, Mr Muruthi Senior, a businessman, said a Town Ace minivan registration number KBA 673H was spotted as it ferried two cows. “I mobilised the youth and several people whose cows have been stolen in the past and we waited strategically near the road. We gave chase and at one point, they dropped one cow in the middle of the road to distract us and diverted into a rough road. They then dropped a spare tyre but we still trailed them as we hooted while others screamed,” he said. CHASE TO POLICE STATION As the chase progressed, 12 more vehicles joined in and the suspects quickly drove into the police station and asked the police to book them in. Igoji East Assistant County Commissioner AbdiRahim Yusuf Sharif said the two were part of a cartel that has been stealing livestock in the region. “Investigations have already started and I would like to assure members of public that the law will take its course. I would like to thank the members of public for their assistance and intelligence that enabled us to arrest the culprits,” he said. Area MCA John Paul Kireria said they had lost at least 30 dairy cows, including one belonging to St Joseph Secondary School. HOPE FOR RECOVERY Following the arrest, tens of farmers who have lost their livestock thronged the police station where the suspects, the vehicle and one cow were taken. A resident of Mwichiune village claimed that on June 1, the same people raided her home after cutting a chain link. St Joseph Secondary School’s board of management vice chairperson Scholastica Kaaria said they hope to get their cow which was stolen in April. “We are happy to know that the thieves have been arrested. We are seeking justice,” she said. Mr Kireria said they had held a security meeting during on Friday and strategized on how to monitor and arrest the thieves who usually strike in the middle of the night during the ongoing curfew.