The Teachers Service Commission (TSC) has ordered a recount of headteachers, their deputies and senior teachers ahead of the implementation of the final phase of 2017-2021 collective bargaining agreement (CBA) next month at Sh11billion. This is after it emerged that country directors provided wrong information to the commission ahead of the implementation of the Sh54 billion CBA for school administrators in July 2017. TSC chief executive officer Nancy Macharia has directed the country directors to provide accurate information by June 30. Close to 100,000 principals, their deputies, headteachers and senior teachers will enjoy the new pay rise starting July. Classroom teachers received their pay rise in two phases. VALIDATE DATA In a circular dated June 3, Ms Macharia said before the implementation of the current CBA on July 1, 2017, county directors were instructed to validate the data for institutional administrators who were on duty as at June 30, 2017. She said the validation exercise was meant to ensure that only teachers serving as instructional administrators were converted as such on the effective date of the CBA and thereafter substantially as per the job evaluation report and policy on appointment and deployment of institutional administrators. “It has been established that some of you provided inaccurate and misleading data leading to erroneous conversion. Classroom teachers were converted to grades exclusively reserved for institutional administrators, teachers serving as deputy or senior teachers were wrongly captured as head teachers while in other instances, staffing levels in terms of required administrators in a school exceeded the optimum establishment contrary to the established norms,” reads the circular by Ms Macharia. The CEO said as a result, the database for institutional administrators at the head office has been found to be inaccurate and unreliable. She said the unreliability of the data has negatively affected the operation of the TSC in terms of payroll management and the process of selection, appointment and deployment of new institutional administrators. GRADE B5 TEACHERS “Consequently, you are hereby directed to critically analyse the said data and re-confirm all institutional administrators serving in your respective counties per school and college,” added Ms Macharia. TSC is also expected to promote a total of 100,000 teachers in Grade B5 (previously P1) who will automatically be moved to Grade C1 starting July with Sh7 billion having been set aside for the exercise. Grade B5 teachers currently earning a basic salary of between Sh21,756 and Sh27,195 will now take home between Sh27, 195 and Sh33, 994. Grade C1 consists of secondary teacher III, secondary teacher III/lecturer III and primary teacher I. A total of 29,782 teachers fall in C1 (primary teacher I and secondary teachers II) while 19,439 fall in C2 (secondary teacher II and secondary teacher UT and primary special need education teacher). TSC which has 320,000 teachers was on Thursday allocated Sh266 billion for its activities. TSC will utilise Sh257.97 billion in teacher resource management.