Some 129 Kenyan students who were stranded in Sudan due to Covid-19 pandemic have been evacuated. The students arrived at the Moi International Airport aboard a Kenya Airways flight on Saturday evening. They were subjected to a mandatory health check upon landing at the airport aboard a Kenya Airways flight before they proceeded to the Kenya School of Government in Kizingo area for a mandatory 14-day quarantine. STAYED INDOORS Mr Salim Bakari a second year Financial Economics student at the International University of Africa said it feels sweet to be back home. "We really appreciate those who have made our return a reality, being away from our loved ones has been quite heartbreaking," Mr Salim said. He noted that while at Khartoum, they stayed indoors as they observed safety guidelines to avoid contracting Covid-19. The students, who were on scholarships are from Mombasa, Kwale, Kilifi and Lamu counties. Mvita MP Abdulswamad Nassir said it was not easy for the students being in a foreign country during this pandemic period. “Eighty three students from Mombasa have safely arrived. It has been great working together to make this a success,” Mr Nassir said. QUARANTINE FACILITY Mombasa County Secretary Dennis Lewa said the county will continue taking care of the students at the quarantine facility. County Chief officer for Health Dr Khadijah Shikely said that the students will all undergo Covid-19 testing. “We thank God for the students’ safe flight back home, we have been in communication with the Ministry of Health and the students will be taken through testing for Covid-19,” Dr Shikely said. She said they were in touch with the other neighboring counties on modalities of ensuring that the students get there safely. Muslims for Human Rights Executive Director Khelef Khalifa said it was an excellent job done for the students. He, however, called on the North Eastern leaders to assist at least 26 more students who are still stranded in Sudan. Mr Patrick Mwavula, president of the Jumuiya Ya Wanafunzi wa Pwani thanked the leaders for their support. We should not entirely depend on the National government but look at our local governments for solutions," Mr Mwavula said. The students had appealed to the government to repatriate them since they could not afford the high cost of air tickets.