No dates, no search Nation.co.ke has been my go-to source for news and information. One of the best qualities that really set nation.co.ke leagues ahead of its nearest competitor, standard.co.ke, was its enhanced searchability functions, which included setting specific date parameters. These options have totally disappeared. Perhaps even more perplexing is that datelines have disappeared altogether. Currently, no articles on nation.co.ke have any datelines. This is just plain crazy. Previously, search results included the publication date under the article title, which was very useful. These, too, have disappeared. I don’t know exactly when these changes occurred but they are extremely disappointing and disheartening. Please change it back to how it was. Please make nation.co.ke great again. — Carl Bevelhy You are publishing old articles without any date-stamps. For example, these two articles still running online highlight my concerns: “CBK sanctions Absa over lax forex checks” and “Binyavanga Wainaina was not afraid to court controversy.” The date-stamp helps filter out older news from current events while increasing your paper’s credibility to readers. Readers are confused when the date-stamp is missing. — Evans Ochieng’ * * * PR for Alfred Mutua I refer to “How to identify who the President of Kenya will be after 2022 polls” by Prof Mathew M. Theuri (Daily Nation, June 15, 2020). The opinion was, in my view, an insult to readers’ intelligence. The article sketchily mentions one or two issues/attributes of four persons — namely, Alfred Mutua, Wycliffe Oparanya, Fred Matiang’i and Hassan Joho — and then expressly goes on to pick Alfred Mutua as the “frontrunner” for the presidency come 2022. How does he pick on Alfred Mutua and why does it sound like the author of this article is marketing Mutua? Secondly, where are all the other big wigs like Raila Odinga, William Ruto, Peter Kenneth, Musalia Mudavadi, etc., in his curious analysis? I strongly feel that this is the one case where you let your readers down by allowing someone to insult their intelligence blatantly. — Stephen Maina * * * Narrow coverage Over the past one year, I’ve noted with concern the growing shift in the coverage of issues facing the country by your newspaper. With each publication, little space is given to issues of development or the lack of it. I’m writing to implore you to be more balanced and to give prominence to issues that are impacting on Kenyans each passing day. — Kipsang Kerich * * * Repeating cartoons The Sunday Nation of May 31, June 7 and 14 repeated the Popeye, Phantom and Flash Gordon cartoons. Apart from the obvious wastage of space, this is an indication of lack of vigilance. Cartoons might occupy a lesser plane in the overall NMG universe, but for those of us who grew up on the superb cartoon offerings of the Sunday Nation, they are a rich fodder for our imaginations, enriching our growing vocabulary while being highly entertaining. Today, in adulthood, cartoons are a welcome release from the dreary humdrum of life. Rectify this state of affairs. The high standards of the Sunday Nation deserve no less. — Robert Mukirae, Kiambu * * * Repeat on same page One of the major constraints news editors lament is limited space. How would you explain the fact that in the Daily Nation of June 16, on page 6, writer Mwangi Muiruri has his story repeated twice on the same page! (“Tvets target to enrol 200,000 students by 2025” and “No vocational training for dropouts: CAS”). — Dr Njau Gitu Send your complaints to publiceditor@ke.nationmedia.com. Call or text 0721 989 264