When Milka Njoroge moved to China in 2009, the least of her worries was her hair yet it soon became her biggest nightmare. She could not find a hairstylist that could fix her African hair and that frustrated her. After a month of desperation, she finally gave in and decided to do her own hair. And just like that, her natural hair journey was born. Within a few months, she became so good at it and would get inquiries mostly from Africans who were eager to find out how she managed to make her own hair so well. And that is when she decided to open a YouTube account to offer tutorials to fellow Africans, especially those who are abroad struggling to get salons and hairstylists who can fix their type of hair. “Circumstances forced me to learn how to make my own hair and I didn’t want other Africans abroad to go through the same problems I went through when I first moved to China hence the YouTube account,” Milka explains to Life& Style. “Basically it was just videos of myself styling my hair in simple steps and the channel gained popularity. I started getting requests from people to make their hair as well. I was glad to help but then the requests kept growing and this is how my career as a Natural Hair Stylist was born,” she adds. Her third video on her YouTube went viral and luckily, she had already set up her channel for monetization. She got a Sh 16,000 paycheck from YouTube and that pushed her even further to continue with the online tutorials as well as taking the bookings, which were growing by the day. After five years in China, Milka settled back in Kenya and decided to pursue natural hair styling as a career, which she says is one of the best decisions she has ever made in her life. “It is like people were waiting for me to come back to Kenya . The bookings continued streaming in and I decided to pursue this fully,” she says. But how has her journey been since she came back to Kenya? “The uptake has really been good. People have now embraced natural hairstyles unlike before and that means I now can comfortably make a living as a natural hair specialist. I am very happy that I managed to turn my passion into a career." “Natural hair is easy to maintain and fairly affordable. In the past, people associated natural hairstyles with the poor but now people appreciate art and simplicity. I have worked with high-end celebrities like Wahu and Size 8 to mention but a few and this clearly shows natural hair has been embraced fully,” she adds. Milka mainly does house calls but for the clients that prefer a salon setting, she can also be booked at the Afro Siri Salon in Westlands, Nairobi. Check her works on YouTube and Instagram – 4CHairChiq.