Norway’s Ingebrigtsen brothers are looking to kill several birds with one stone in Thursday's “Impossible Games” virtual race against Kenya’s distance running superstars. Besides seeking to upset the Kenyans, the Ingebrigtsen brothers (Filip, Jakob and Henrik) are chasing the European 2,000 metres record of former world 1,500 metres champion Steve Cram. The Briton holds the fastest time over the distance at four minutes, 51.39 seconds set way back in 1985 during a memorable season that saw him shatter three world records in just 19 days (3:29.67 for 1,500m; 3:46.32 for the mile; 4:51.39 for 2,000m). Thursday night's may be a team event, but the Norwegians will also be looking at running faster than Cram over the distance. And they will be aided by new running technology. Dutch sports management company, Global Sports Communications (GSC), have teamed up with SPORT Technologies and conjured up what’s being referred to as #Wavelight technology, an innovative light “pacemaker” fitted in the inside rail of the running track. “The innovative lighting system fitted to the inside rail of the track and set at an assigned pace will not only help athletes achieve their goal time but also enrich the experience of the athletics fans following the action,” GSC explained in a statement Wednesday. “#Wavelight – so named because the fluid motion of the lights resembles a Mexican Wave – is to be utilised at several events at the Impossible Games including the 2,000m team event in which the Ingebrigtsen brothers – Jakob, Filip and Henrik - will be seeking to post a fast time, and in the women’s 3000m in which Norway’s Karoline Bjerkeli Grovdal will be attempting to set a national record,” the statement added. GSC director Jos Hermens, whose company also manages top global distance running stars including Kenya’s world marathon record holder Eliud Kipchoge and multiple world cross country and half marathon champion Geoffrey Kamworor, along with Ethiopian legends Kenenisa Bekele and Haile Gebrselassie, says the new technology will benefit runners, coaches and also spectators.  It has been in use “We have used #Wavelight technology for the past couple of years at the Hengelo and Nijmegen meets but for it to be showcased at the Impossible Games is an incredible opportunity for the product to be seen to a wider audience,” explained Hermens. “It offers not only a huge benefit for the athletes in their quest for setting qualification marks, PB’s and records it also immeasurably enhances the spectator experience. “As a fan watching the Wavelights on TV, it is very 