The theme of this year’s African Public Service Day, “Entrenching Good Governance: Developing Transparent and Accountable Public Institutions”, puts focus on the quality of human resource in the public service. It’s a response to the increasing public agitation globally that human resource should be at the centre of demand for transparent and accountable public sector institutions. This goes beyond delivering a task or service. It means public servants are answerable if a service is not delivered in a timely and efficient manner. Service delivery is not only a responsibility of government but a citizen’s right, which they can demand. Studies show that human resource management strategies, ranging from talent acquisition, employee performance management and development strategies, have a positive and significant impact on service delivery. EFFICIENCY It is, therefore, the primary responsibility of the Public Service Commission, under Article 234 of the Constitution, to ensure public service is managed by ethical and professional public servants accountable to the citizens while ensuring efficiency and effectiveness of the public service, recruitment and developing human resource. Covid-19 has not spared the PSC. The way in which we interact within departments, and citizen-to-government engagement, has seen a significant shift owing to the working-from-home requirements. The PSC has turned to information and communication technology solutions to ensure delivery of its core mandate is not adversely affected. During this lockdown, the PSC has leveraged virtual technology to recruit and provide critical personnel in a timely manner to ministries, departments and agencies (MDAs) managing Covid-19. Interviews are conducted via WebEx and telephone to comply with the Health ministry guidelines. It recruited 5,550 health personnel in all counties. It also recruited the director-general and deputy director-general and appointed the authorised officer for Nairobi Metropolitan Services. MEDIUM-TERM VISION We have placed a call for the third round of the Public Service Internship Programme (PSIP). The first and second rounds brought in about 12,000 interns on a 12-month programme. The objective is to develop young graduates for the job market. The medium-term vision of the PSC, contained in the Strategic Plan 2019-2024, is citizen-centric public service. The Covid-19 situation presents opportunities and challenges.  Before, public service transformation initiatives considered both online and non-online solutions almost on an equal footing. But paper-based solutions and face-to-face services are increasingly giving way to online services that are accessible remotely.  The shift to digital technologies is, therefore, an integrated part of our transformation and innovation strategies. Specifically, the PSC intends to increase access to public services through ICT platforms — providing information and services as and where needed, focusing on the unserved, under-served and citizen service delivery pain points. We are establishing a Citizen Contact Centre as a one-stop point for citizens’ service delivery in the public service. The primary objective of these initiatives is to achieve transparency and accountability in public service delivery; improve the quality and effectiveness and efficiency of public service delivery; and require explicit service delivery obligations be met by service providers, and implement mechanisms to ensure performance and accountability. VIRTUAL INTERVIEW CENTRES The PSC is seeking partners in the various regions, either county governments or public service institutions, to set up regional virtual interview centres. This will dramatically reduce travel time and expenditure for candidates from far-flung parts of the country. The PSC is also exploring possibilities of collaborating with the Huduma Centres to ensure that services that don’t need physical visit to the offices are offered at the citizens’ convenience. Experience demonstrates that with ethical, professional, efficient and dedicated public service, countries can achieve sustainable development and improve livelihoods. Today’s anniversary provides a platform for public service institutions to share best practices and promote solidarity among public institutions by fostering relationships towards a shared vision on public management in Africa. The PSC’s value proposition on this day is to implement strategies and programmes that will enable us to recruit and retain a well-trained, professional and skilled public service workforce and develop fit-for-purpose structures capable of delivering on the government’s development agenda and citizens’ needs. Mr Kirogo is the chairman, Public Service Commission.