The Sports Ministry is targeting 1,800 sportsmen and women in its Covids-19 financial stimulus package and food distribution across the country. Sports cabinet secretary Amina Mohammed disclosed Tuesday that by last weekend, they had reached out to 600 sportsmen and women, who have received Sh10,000 each and food packages. Amina rolled out the stimulus package last week with 12 Kenyan Premier League clubs being the first to benefit from the initial release of Sh20 million stimulus. The government has set aside Sh50 million to cushion sportsmen and women from Covid-19 effects. Amina was speaking when she presided over the distribution of food packages by Care Package Organisation to 200 sportswomen drawn from six disciplines at the Nyayo National Stadium. Amina, who commended Care Package and their other partners for the initiative, said they have so far received supporting totaling Sh 20 million from the private and public sectors towards the Covid-19 athletes support program. “We shall continue with these initiatives until Covid-19 eases and the sporting calendar reopens,” said Amina, who was accompanied by Sports Principal Secretary Joe Okudo and Care Package founder Jackie Janmohammed. Also present were Kenya Rugby Union (chairman) Oduor Gangla and National Paralympic Committee of Kenya president, Agnes Oluoch. Among the sportswomen who benefited were from Kenya Lionesses, Harambee Starlets, national cricket team, national deaf team and Paralympics. “The packages could be small but we hope it will cushion them for some days and it’s my hope that more partners will come on board,” said Janmohammed, who was among Kenyans who were conferred with the Wazalendo Award on Madaraka Day by President Uhuru Kenyatta. Janmohammed said she would like all the athletes in the program to be receiving the food packages after every two weeks until Covid-19 is eradicated and the sporting calendar resumes. “That will depend on how much funds are raised and I believe in sustainability. This shouldn’t be a one-off affair,” said Janmohamed adding that they have also reached out to 6,000 families in the last two months. Gangla commended Care Package initiative and the government’s stimulus package that have seen the national team players benefiting. “Most of these players derive their livelihood from rugby and that has been disrupted. Every one of them is fighting to make ends meet,” said Gangla, who also thanked cubs that are supporting their respective players at these difficult times.