Posta Rangers Chairman John Tonui has called on the Ministry of Sports to include the team in it's Covid-19 stimulus package being given out to cushion vulnerable players. The club has not paid its players for the past three months and Tonui says they deserve the financial aid just like other Kenyan Premier League clubs. Last month, the Ministry of Sports offered players and officials from 12 KPL clubs a Sh30,000 package to cushion them from the effects of coronavirus pandemic over the next three months. The players will receive the second batch of the package which is Sh10,000 this month and the same amount next month. However, clubs sponsored by state corporations like Bandari, Posta Rangers, KCB, Ulinzi Stars, Tusker and financially stable Wazito, owned by tycoon Ricardo Badoer, were left out of the package because of the view that they have remained financially a float during this period. "The Ministry should consider cushioning all the clubs because even teams owned by state parastatals like Posta are going through tough financial times caused by the deadly virus. We have delayed paying our players by three months because our sponsors are experiencing financial constraints and are also affected by this tough existing situation caused by the virus," Tonui told Nation Sport. The KPL side, under the tutelage of veteran tactician Sammy 'Pamzo' Omollo, is sponsored by mailing company, Postal Corporation of Kenya (PCK). The company engages in businesses like sending of parcels, money transfer, banking transfer and letters. With the closure of airports and suspension of international flights, the state corporation may be headed for a bleak future if the coronavirus pandemic cases continue increasing in the future. Despite the challenges bedeviling PCK, Posta Rangers have partly impressed compared to llast season when they narrowly escaped relegation by finishing 16th. Prior to the league's abrupt halt, The mailman were 11th on the log with 31 points from 23 round matches with 10 matches left to play. They were also scheduled to play Gor Mahia in the round of 16 of the Football Kenya Federation Betway Cup at Afraha in Nakuru in March. The game however aborted after K'Ogalo failed to turn up citing government directive on curbing the spread of coronavirus as the main reason for not honouring the tie.