A 15-member interfaith council has started deliberations on the protocol for reopening places of worship as the country continues to ease Covid-19 containment measures. Interior Cabinet Secretary Fred Matiang’i and his Health counterpart Mutahi Kagwe Wednesday inaugurated the council. Dr Matiang’i said the government is ready to work with religious leaders in managing the pandemic by providing them with the necessary support, including data from both ministries in facilitating their deliberations. “I’m hoping to hear from the council in two to three weeks’ time on what they have deliberated on in pushing the country forward,” he said. “The Ministry of Health has also arranged for a number of professionals who will advise the religious leaders in establishing a protocol on the reopening of our places of worship.” The Interior CS also noted that once the council finishes its work, the report will be sent to President Uhuru Kenyatta. “We do not want to pre-empt the discussions that will be made, instead we want to give the leaders space to deliberate. The leaders will look into the challenges we are likely to face when we reopen our places of worship and how to deal with them,” he said. Following a directive from President Kenyatta, the Interior and Health ministries appointed the council last week. As part of its mandate, the Council, chaired by Archbishop Anthony Muheria of the Nyeri Catholic Archdiocese, will supervise the resumption of in-person congregational worship and spiritual functions in strict adherence to the containment measures. “We are going to have sessions with the other members of the council where we will take the advice given to us by the two ministries on the issues that we should take as reference points, with special consideration being the safety of Kenyans,” said Archbishop Muheria. Although religious leaders have been calling for the reopening of places of worship since they were first closed on March 22, there has been hesitation to do so given the high risk that large crowds pose. Other countries have suffered a high number of infections resulting from church gatherings. In Germany, for example, a cluster of 112 infections and one death were traced to one church, while another 30 cases were traced to a church in West Virginia in the United States. Archbishop Muheria noted that the council’s efforts will only be successful if Kenyans are willing to comply with government regulations, among them social distancing and proper sanitation. “The reopening of our public spaces of worship will largely depend on ... our willingness to protect each other, making it safe to meet with minimal risks,” he added.