A former Isiolo MCA has moved to court seeking orders to impeach Governor Mohamed Kuti over allegations of abuse of office, corruption, gross misconduct and violation of the Constitution. In a case filed in the High Court in Meru, Moses Kithinji, the former Bulapesa Ward representative claims that the county boss has failed to execute his duties and to prevent continued plunder of public resources which has greatly affected residents. Through his lawyers Simon Mburu and Kiogora Mugambi, the petitioner wants the governor declared unfit to hold public office for gross violation of the Public Finance Management Act, Leadership and Integrity Act and nepotism in hiring of top county officers. APPOINTMENTS He claims that the governor deliberately and unlawfully by-passed the role of the County Public Service Board and without advertising in the dailies, recently appointed 12 senior officers who include his family members, tribesmen and friends. “The respondent has appointed officers without following due process of the law and guided by favouritism and ulterior motives, disregarded the employment of the deserving and qualified candidates for the job,” his petition reads. In so doing, Mr Kithinji argues, the diversity of the county has not been demonstrated by the conduct of the governor, which he says is blatant violation of the law. He further claims that the governor failed to consider women and people with disabilities for county jobs. DERELICTION OF DUTY He said there had been notable dereliction of duty by the respondent and the anti-graft agency in addressing open corruption highlighted by the Auditor-General, particularly in the 2017/2018 financial year. Further, he says no action had been taken against county officials implicated in the report for participating in massive corruption. The petitioner cited discrepancies raised by the Auditor-General between the county government’s financial statements and the Integrated Financial Management System (Ifmis), including the Sh1.72 billion that was captured on the latter but did not reflect on the former. More so, Sh592 million was spent outside the Ifmis, system making it impossible to verify the accuracy of the expenditure. The county reportedly spent Sh201 million on emergency relief food but no records on dates, venue and people who benefited was provided to support the expenditure. DOLLAR ACCOUNTS In the over 100 pages submission, Mr Kithinji also contends that the county was running dollar accounts at a local commercial bank, contrary to Public Finance (County Government Regulations, 2015) that requires the executive to hold any foreign accounts at Central Bank. The respondent’s acts, the petitioner says, had brought ridicule and mockery to the office of the governor. The petitioner also wants the governor surcharged for all the public funds lost by Isiolo County, as per the Auditor-General’s reports, during his tenure as the county boss. KUTI’S OBJECTION Through lawyer Ken Muriuki, the governor has already filed a preliminary objection to have the petition struck out, arguing that the court has no jurisdiction to hear the matter as issues raised are in the exclusive jurisdiction of other constitutional bodies. He cites the Ethics and Anti-Corruption Commission (EACC) as the body exclusively charged with dealing with State officers who have breached the law. “The court cannot investigate matters of alleged graft and make conclusions because it would be usurping the roles of EACC. By so doing, the court would be charging and making decisions over an innocent respondent,” the governor contends. REMOVAL PROCEDURE Mr Muriuki says Section 33 of County Government Act provides an elaborate procedure for the removal of his client and that the court cannot, on the basis of allegations and unsubstantiated facts, declare that the governor is unfit to hold public office and recommend his removal. “We pray that the notice for preliminary objection be upheld and the petition be struck with no costs,” reads the preliminary objection. Justice Alfred Mabeya directed that both parties appear before him on July 7, 2020 for submissions to dispense the preliminary objection.