The National Assembly has until Tuesday to debate and approve the 2020 Supplementary Appropriation (No.3) Bill before it is taken to the President for signing into law later that day. Tuesday marks the end of the 2019/20 financial year, meaning that, under the Constitution, the expenditures incurred by the government during the year must be regularised before July 1, the start of the next financial year. This comes after MPs adopted the report of the Budget and Appropriations Committee on the Supplementary Budget III for the 2019/20 financial year late yesterday. On Tuesday this week, Majority Leader Amos Kimunya (Kipipiri) tabled the revised estimates in the House that will see the government increase recurrent and development expenditures by Sh11.3 billion. BUDGET QUESTIONED At least Sh9 billion will go towards recurrent expenditure and Sh2.68 billion for development. The overall expenditure is a reduction by the committee from Sh16 billion that the National Treasury had proposed. On Thursday, the budget committee, in record time and just within hours of a session with Treasury CAS Nelson Gaichuhie and PS Julius Muia of scrutinising the estimates, tabled a report that was debated and approved by MPs. This means that the 2020 Supplementary Appropriation (No.3) Bill must be published over the weekend ahead of debate on it on Tuesday. “The report on the estimates must be approved by this House today so as to ensure the Supplementary Appropriation Bill is passed before Tuesday,” Mr Kimunya said after moving a procedural motion to have the House sit a second time after 2.30pm yesterday to consider the revised estimates. But Kitui Central MP Makali Mulu, a member of the budget committee, questioned the timing of a third supplementary budget in the financial year. SUPPLEMENTARY BUDGET “This supplementary budget inconveniences the budget calendar and applies unnecessary pressure to the National Assembly to scrutinise the allocations,” he said. In its report, the committee rejected a proposal by the Treasury to raid Sh3 billion ring-fenced for hospitals dealing with Covid-19 cases. The money was protected during the Supplementary Budget II passed in April so as to cushion patients from being billed for treatment. The Treasury wanted Sh2 billion removed from the kitty for procuring Covid-19 testing kits and face masks, among others, in what could have led to double allocation. The move would have seen Covid-19 patients once again told to pay for their treatment.