Police in Rachuonyo South, Homa Bay County, have arrested a 15-year-old Form One student accused of murdering a Grade Four pupil in Nduga village, Kachien North Location. The suspect was arrested on Sunday afternoon. He is accused of murdering Noel Adhiambo Midenyo, 11, on June 19. Rachuonyo South Police Commander Esau Ochorokodi said the suspect has been remanded at a local police station as he awaits to be arraigned. DECOMPOSING BODY Midenyo's decomposing body, who was a pupil at Kosele Community Christian Centre, was found by her relatives on June 21 after she was reported missing for two days. She went missing while looking after her family’s livestock at a grazing field in her village on June 19. Her mother, Ms Christine Awino, said the girl left home with her elder sister to look after cattle. “The two girls have been actively involved in household chores. Both have been helping the family since schools were closed. They left home at 10am like they usually did,” she said. CONFRONTED Mr Awino, a widow, claimed that her daughters were confronted by one of the boys in the village who insulted them for unknown reasons. She said her elder daughter reported to her that they had been attacked by the boy and his brother who is in Form One. “After insulting my daughters, the boy ran back home and brought his elder brother who attacked the girls using rocks and a club,” Ms Awino claimed. MAIZE PLANTATION The dead girl is reported to have ran into a maize plantation as her sister ran back home to report the incident. The two boys are said to have followed the younger sister into the plantation where they allegedly killed her. Midenyo’s body was found on the evening of June 21, 2020. A post-mortem report showed that the pupil was hit with a blunt object on her right ribs. Her attacker fractured three of her ribs. The post-mortem report added that bleeding affected her breathing system causing instant death. The report said the fractures injured to her internal organs. Mr Ochorokodi said the suspect will be charged with murder.