The first half of this year has not been kind to the music scene, as we have lost many prominent musicians, especially in the past three months. Among the victims of the deadly Covid-19 elsewhere in the world are two top African musicians, Manu Dibango and Arlus Mabele. In Kenya, we have lost several prominent musicians to various ailments. They include Aziz Abdi, Kasongo wa Kanema, Jimmy Wayuni and John Nzenze. We take a brief and sobering look at the musicians we have lost so early in the year. MANU DIBANGO In March, at the onset of the Covid-19 pandemic, music fans were stunned by the news of the death of Cameroonian jazz musician Dibango at 86 in Paris. Dibango will be best remembered for playing the saxophone and his exploits in jazz music. His illustrious musical career dates back to the early 1960s, when he made his debut with the legendary Congolese maestro Grand Kalle Jeff. He is best known for his 1972 hit “Soul Makosa”. His most popular albums include “African Vodoo”, “Super Kumba”, “The World of Manu Dibango”, “African Rhythm Machine”, “Dance with Manu Dibango” and “Africa Boogie”. KENNY ROGERS Also in March, there was more grief with the death of the legendary country musician Kenny Rogers. He died in Sandy Springs, Georgia, USA. The singer, actor and producer, who died at 81, will be remembered for his string of country songs such as the “The Gambler”, “Coward of the Country”, “Lady/Don’t Fall in Love with a Dreamer and “You Decorated My LIfe”. As an actor, he featured in movies and television shows such as The Gambler,  Six Pack and NBC Mystery Movie. He won several artistic awards in a career spanning over six decades. ARLUS MABELE  Soukous Congolese music legend Aurlus Mabele died on March 19 in a Paris hospital. He, too, had tested positive for Covid-19. The former band leader of the once popular Paris-based Soukous Loketo group suffered stroke a few years ago. Aurlus, who died at 67, was known for his flamboyant stage shows and was among the founders of the Loketo Band in the late 1980s alongside solo guitar wizard Diblo Dibala, Remy Sah’lomon and Jean Baron. Some of their popular songs are “Extra Ball”, “Douce Isabella” and” Choc a Distance”. Kenyan fans of Aurlus got a chance to watch him when he toured Nairobi in 1991 backed by his then solo guitarist Dally Kimoko. Also backing him was Jean Baron and then drummer Awilo Longomba, who later became a solo musician. AZIZ ABDI KILAMBO  Kenya lost Aziz Abdi Kilambo on April 11 at a hospital in Voi. The band leader, singer, guitarist and composer died at 67. He will be remembered for a string of hit songs, including “Sina Kazi” and “Nyumbani”. He was band leader of the Benga Africa Band before it was switched to the multitalented Ngoma Afrika Band. KASONGO WA KANEMA Hardly a week after Aziz’s death,  veteran Congolese musician Kasongo wa Kanema died. He was a former singer with Super Mazembe. At 66, he was among the three former members of Super Mazembe based in Kenya alongside Loboko Passie and Dodo Doris, who died a week ago in Nairobi. His songs include “Kakolele Viva Christmas”, “Loboko”, “Longwa” and “Kayembe”. Besides Super Mazembe, Kasongo also had stints with groups such as Orch Virunga,  Orch Ibeba  System and Ivory Band. Kasongo was buried at the Lang’ata Cemetry in Nairobi, where most of his former Nairobu based Congolese fellow musicians were laid to rest JIMMY WAYUNI On May 26, benga musician Jimmy Wayuni Githinji died in a road accident on Thika Road. The 60-year-old Wayuni was a retired Kenya Revenue Authority deputy commissioner. Wayuni will be remembered for songs such as “Mama Sululu”. “Horia Kanua” and “Murogoti”. He also took part in recording various local and foreign movies. JOHN NZENZE  On May 30, twist music fans learnt of the death of legendary singer, composer and guitarist John Amutabi Nzenze. He died of prostrate cancer at St Elizabeth Hospital Mukumu, Kakamega County, at 80. Nzenze was buried last Saturday at his farm in Kaptech, Hamisi, Vihiga County. His biggest song was “Angelike Twist”. PETE OPENDA On June 6, actor and TV host Pete Openda died after a long battle with thyroid cancer, according to his family. Pete, who died aged 57, was part of the cast of TV shows like “Changing Times” and “New Beginnings”. He was also a presenter of a jazz show on KBC. ABENNY JACHIGA The death of the immensely popular ohangla Abenny Jachiga (Bernard Onyango Obonyo)  on June 11 in Kisumu drew nationwide attention. His fans in Kisumu, unhappy with plans for a hurried burial, engaged police in running battles. He was, however, buried later last Saturday night. The 33-year-old will be remembered for songs such as “Mano Kasinde”, “Penzi ni Kama Yai” and “Nancy Nyar Ugenya”. OMONDI LONG’LILO Earlier this week, the benga fraternity lost Omondi Long’lilo, who had been ailing for a while. Long’lilo was among the few surviving benga musicians who made a breakthrough performing in veteran Osito Kalle’s Orch Nabi Kings Band. His contemporaries include Odhiambo Tusker and Atomy Sifa. Some of his most popular songs are “Goretty Awino”, “Thomas Mwaya” and “Were Wuod Ogalo”. DODO DORIS Last week, the rhumba music fraternity was  mourning former Orch Super Mazembe drummer Dodo Doris (Robert Kitenge), who died on  June 12. Doris, 71, was the sole surviving member of the Original Super Mazembe band Bana Mushosho. He  succumbed after a long battle with chest complications.