Makutano Stadium in West Pokot County — which lies along the Kitale-Lodwar highway — is well-known for producing top sporting talent. World beaters such as former New York Marathon champion Tegla Loroupe, 2017 World Cross Country champion Irene Cheptai, 2012 London Olympic Games 5,000 metres bronze medallist Thomas Longosiwa and upcoming athlete Jacob Krop, among others, come from West Pokot. But the county’s flagship stadium is not in a good state. The West Pokot County Government had planned to improve the facility, but was slowed down by investigations being done by the Ethics and Anti-Corruption Commission (EACC) into the stadium’s financing. Makutano Stadium, which can hosts almost 2,000 people, has three gates, a permanent perimeter wall and a few terraces for spectators. When Nation Sport visited the stadium on Thursday, we found it virtually deserted due to the government’s directive on social distancing to curb the spread of coronavirus. The county government mainly uses the stadium for cultural festivals and other functions while sportsmen and women in the region suffer. TEGLA LOROUPE PEACE RACE There is no running track for athletes, and they are now forced to focus they speed work sessions along the roads. The stadium has played host to the Tegla Loroupe Peace Race that attracts athletes from neighbouring countries. The football field has been levelled, but part of it is overgrown with grass, making it difficult for local football teams to play. They are now using Chewoiyet High School and Tartar Girls High School grounds for training. West Pokot Governor John Lonyangapuo says he has good plans for the youth in the region and is waiting for the EACC to clear its investigations so that they can develop the stadium. “This is a land of hidden treasure. Our youth are talented, but the previous regime had audit queries involving the stadium land which the EACC is looking into. We want to rehabilitate the stadium so that the youths’ talent is nurtured. “The investigations have taken long, but I’m informed that the process is almost complete. We hope in the next financial year of 2020/2021 we shall be able to allocate funds to improve the stadium,” Lonyangapuo said. He noted that the stadium needs to be upgraded and the drainage improved. The governor said that they also plan to build small stadiums in every constituency in West Pokot County. Kapenguria Heroes Football Club has been using West Pokot Stadium for training. The team’s manager, Ken Mnang’at, said the stadium needs to be revamped because players have been performing well. In 2018, Kapenguria Heroes won the “Chapa Dimba na Safaricom”national title by beating Gor Mahia Youth 3-0 on penalties at Bukhungu Stadium in Kakamega. The team won Sh1 million for their exploits and a trip to the United Kingdom.“Our youths are talented, if we had good facilities we would have produced many more top performers. My plea is for the county government and the Kapenguria Constituency Development Fund to work together and improve sports facilities,” Mnang’at said. West Pokot has produced some of the best footballers in the country who are playing for other clubs such as Brian Lumumba (Kericho Zoo), David Majak (Tusker FC) and John Kato, a student who was awarded a sports scholarship at Montvarde Academy in USA. Governor Lonyangapuo said that with such talent, local sportsmen and women deserve better facilities. He said he would ensure that schools have better playgrounds before the end of his first term in office. “We have improved playing grounds in some of the schools because we want to tap more talent. In the next two years, we want more top athletes to come from West Pokot,” Lonyangapuo said.