Multiple world cross country and half marathon champion Geoffrey Kamworor is recovering in an Eldoret hospital after he was injured in a freak accident while on his Thursday morning run. The world half marathon record holder was hit from behind by a speeding motorcycle, sustaining injuries on his head and ankle. Kamworor told Nation Sport from his hospital bed that he sustained injuries above the ankle and on his head. DOUBLE TRAGEDY It was double tragedy for Kamworor, 28, after organisers on Thursday cancelled November’s New York City marathon where he would have defended his title. Kamworor was also lined up to defend his World Half Marathon Championships title at this year’s rescheduled race in Gdynia, Poland, on October 17. According to Dr Victor Bargoria, who treated Kamworor Friday, diagnosis was to open incomplete right tibia shaft fracture, knee bruises and scalp laceration. “The procedure was debridement of contused contaminated soft tissue and loose bone fragments followed by irrigation and wound closure,” he explained after attending to the star at the St Luke's Hospital in Eldoret. The surgery took place one month after another successful surgery on world 800 metres record holder and Olympic champion David Rudisha who twisted his ankle at his home in Kilgoris, Narok County. The motorcyclist stopped and helped the injured champion to the hospital where he was admitted. “I was one kilometre away from my home during my morning run when a speeding motorcycle hit me from behind and I fell down injuring my leg,” Kamworor explained. “I also got injuries in my head and he helped me up and took me to the hospital where I was admitted.” He said that he expects to be discharged today after the surgery went on successfully. "The doctor has advised me to rest and I will be discharged maybe today but I will be waiting for him to give me clean bill of health,” said the champion. Bargoria confirmed the champion could be released Friday. “I received the patient on Thursday morning and we managed to do a surgery which was to open incomplete right tibia shaft fracture on his right leg and bruises on his head. He is doing well and he should be leaving for home anytime," said Bargoria. He said the planned follow up will be leg CT scan, IV antibiotics, analgesics, wound care and rehabilitation for recovery. ELIUD KIPCHOGE Kamworor’s training partner in Kaptagat and world marathon record holder Eliud Kipchoge wished Kamworor a quick recovery. “The world is full of uncertainties, one of them is what happened to my teammate and friend. “I wish him a very quick recovery,” Kipchoge told Nation Sport. Kamworor was among the first athletes to be affected by the coronavirus pandemic after World Athletics postponed the World Half Marathon Championships from March to October 17. As if that wasn't enough, the soft-spoken Kamworor suffered another blow when the New York Marathon was cancelled due to the coronavirus pandemic. Kamworor then said he is disappointed but respects the authorities saying life matters more during this period of coronavirus. “I respect the decision of the authorities and that means we now need to get ready for next year because the virus has disrupted the sporting calendar. “Looking forward to celebrating a marathon weekend in 2021 and stay safe always," said Kamworor. Michael Capiraso who is president and CEO of New York Road Runners, New York Marathon's organisers said in a statement: "Cancelling this year's New York City Marathon is incredibly disappointing for everyone involved, but it was clearly the course we needed to follow from a health and safety perspective." Kamworor is also the world half marathon record holder after breaking the previous mark at the Copenhagen Half Marathon on September 15 last year when clocked 58:01. Athletes across the country went back to their homes after the first coronavirus was announced in Kenya with the ministry of health government giving out measures on social distancing and staying away from a crowded place. This forced athletes to train also on their own after all the races they were to participate in were either cancelled or postponed.