A meeting of Meru MCAs called by Agriculture Cabinet Secretary Peter Munya at his home Saturday has revived political supremacy battles with Governor Kiraitu Murungi. MCAs allied to Mr Munya have accused assembly Majority Leader Victor Karithi of whipping Jubilee Party members against attending the meeting. Minority Leader Ayub Bundi and nominated MCA Sarah Gakii said Mr Karithi should be held accountable for attempting to sabotage the meeting. Ms Gakii said the meeting will discuss development projects and reforms to benefit Meru farmers. The CS is spearheading major reforms and initiating programmes to boost tea, coffee, cotton, maize, fish among other agricultural produce in the country and has been traversing counties to listen to the people. “Mr Munya has called the meeting to hear the issues affecting agriculture. I do not understand why the majority leader would want to warn Jubilee party members not to attend the meeting,” Ms Gakii said. She claimed that the Jubilee MCAs in Meru were being warned of dire consequences if they attended the meeting Sunday. Ms Gakii added that Mr Karithi was under instructions from the governor to scuttle the meeting for political expediency. “It is sad that the majority leader can instruct MCAs not to attend a development meeting for personal benefit. "The public should know that those who will not attend the meeting are serving selfish interests. They should instead attend the meeting to give their views on what wananchi want done in the agriculture sector,” she said. Mr Bundi said those who would boycott the meeting were against the president’s development agenda, which is being advanced by CS Munya. “Those who will not attend will be doing so at the expense of development. The governor should wait for his turn to call a similar meeting because he is always with the MCAs,” Mr Bundi said. The ward reps defended Mr Munya saying he was not engaging in politics and that when time comes, he will show his political prowess. But Mr Karithi said he had not been instructed by any his party leader to attend any meeting. “Any leader is free to host MCAs, MPs or any other leaders for a meeting particularly if they adhere to the set down regulations on Covid-19. It would be stupefying not to” Mr Karithi said.