Kirinyaga Governor Anne Waiguru has forgiven ward representatives who impeached her. The governor said her clearance by the Senate marks a remarkable and historic victory in her political life. She stressed that her impeachment was all a choreographed plan of events that was aimed at tarnishing her name. "But have I forgiven the forces behind my impeachment," she said on Saturday. COUNTY DEVELOPMENT She called upon the Kirinyaga County Assembly ward representatives to play their part in ensuring the devolved unit moves forward in terms of development. "Rather than prioritising funds to projects such as building offices for MCAs, the ward representatives should prioritise allocations of funds for Covid-19 pandemic management and healthcare as proposed by the executive," she said. “We have much to do and little time to achieve it. My government remains ready and willing to do work with like-minded individuals committed to the service of the residents,” she added. She noted that her impeachment process did not meet the required threshold and that is why it was rejected by the Senate. However she observed that the Senate report's findings revealed areas of improvement in administration by officers and need for better checks and balances. She assured the residents that this will be addressed and necessary changes and improvement will be made to human resource and systems to improve service delivery to the people of Kirinyaga. IMPEACHMENT But Ms Waiguru told the residents that the politically instigated impeachment process has not affected her commitment to serve them. "I'm more resolved to ensure the residents get the service they deserve. It is unfortunate, the political innuendos have robbed the residents of their right to receive service from their leaders but I assure them that I will do my best to ensure that Kirinyaga Rising vision is achieved,” she said in a statement. She attributed her woes to her support for the Building Bridges Initiative and the handshake between Orange Democratic Movement leader Raila Odinga and President Uhuru Kenyatta. She vowed neither to give up nor change her commitment to improve the lives of children and women in the entire country. “We must continue our quest for a better Kenya whatever the price that will be," she said. She particularly thanked her husband Kamotho Waiganjo who had been supportive to her throughout her trial.