Kenya Open Golf Limited will give financial aid to members of the 2019/20 Safari Tour season. This move is aimed at helping the professional golfers to meet some of their financial commitment during this time when it is not possible to play golf due to the restrictions that are in place to stop the spread of the dreaded Covid-19. The 54 Safari Tour members - who are made up of 39 Kenyans, 10 Ugandans, two Nigerians, and one each from Senegal, Rwanda and Zimbabwe - participated in 11 tournaments that were played from August 2019 and February 2020. Seven out of the 11 tournaments were played in Kenya while four were played in Uganda. “Many of our professional golfers have been adversely affected by the current restrictions instituted to minimise the spread of the dreaded Covid-19,” said Peter Kanyago, the Chairman of Kenya Open Golf Limited. “In doing their part to stop the spread of the dreaded virus, our members have suffered a lot due to loss of income. We are giving them a small token to help take some sting out of these harsh and uncertain times that we currently find ourselves in,” added Kanyago. The money totalling almost Sh1.3 million is drawn from the entry and membership fees charged during the 2019/20 season, will be shared among the 54 members of the Safari Tour many of whom are currently not earning any income. This means each member will receive Sh24,000, a gesture which was described by Professional Golfers of Kenya (PGK) captain John Wangai as a timely and well thought idea by the Kenya Open Golf Limited. “This gesture from Kenya Open Golf Limited could not have come at a better time,” said John Wangai, the Captain of the professional golfers of Kenya. “This is the best thing that has happened to professional golfers since the postponement of the Magical Kenya Open in March. On behalf of the Safari Tour family, I would like to thank the board of Kenya Open Golf Limited for coming to our aid at our hour of need,” added Wangai. Meanwhile the Kenya Open Golf Limited will consult with the Government of Kenya to find the safest way to commence the 2020/21 Safari Tour. Initially the Tour which now attracts players from various other African countries besides Kenya, had been scheduled to start in April and was to feature more events as well as improved prize money.