Leaders and residents of Nakuru, Nyandarua, Laikipia and Samburu counties have supported the government’s decision to adjust the nationwide curfew time. President Uhuru Kenyatta on Saturday extended the curfew by 30 days, but relaxed the time from 9pm to 4am. Earlier, the dusk to dawn curfew started at 7pm and ended at 5am. In Nyandarua, politicians, the clergy and traders praised President Kenyatta's speech, terming it as well thought. ECONOMIC GROWTH Nyandarua Governor Francis Kimemia said the new Covid-19 directives will stimulate the stalled economic growth.  “President’s pronouncements were guided by professional views and it is now upon all Kenyans to adhere to the social distancing guidelines,” said Governor Kimemia. Nyandarua Interfaith Council Chairperson Bishop Josam Kariuki said religious leaders are ready to adhere to Covid-19 guidelines in places of worship.  “We will work very closely with the national government to ensure that protocols are followed,” said Bishop Kariuki. Nyandarua Municipality Traders Association Chairman John Maina said the extension of the curfew hours will benefit smallest traders. Nakuru County Jubilee Party Branch Secretary Mtumishi Cheruiyot said the extension would help control the spread of Covid-19. ECONOMIC CRISIS He however, called on the government to give latops to thousands of students for easy access to e-learning materials. In Laikipia County, residents said the move will enable them to gradually recover from the economic crisis caused by the pandemic.  “The President’s decision to adjust the curfew hours will allow us to work from 7pm to 9pm,” said Ms Judy Muthoni, a grocery trader in Nyahururu town. In Elburgon, Bishop Kamuri Muya of Talent’s Church said the extension of dusk to dawn curfew hours would spur economic growth.  In Naivasha Mr Geoffrey Muhoro said relaxing all the Covid-19 measures would have worsened the coronavirus situation in the country. “I was worried that the government would relax all the measures. I was opposed to it. The President has done well," he said. BUSINESS In Samburu the business community welcomed the government’s move to amend the curfew hours. They said the time extension will turn around their businesses fortunes. Ms Marryane Wambui, a trader said that she will now increase her stock of goods following the extension of trading hours. Mr Vincent Lekenit who owns a butchery in Maralal termed curfew hours as 'friendly'.   Reports by Francis Mureithi, Waikwa Maina, Steve Njuguna, John Njoroge, Macharia Mwangi and Geoffrey Ondieki