If one’s childhood interests always determined what career they took up, Sharon Alella wouldn’t be in the sports industry. She may have loved football growing up, but the prospect of a career in sports never crossed her mind. She wanted to be a pharmacist, but couldn’t make the grade to go to medical school, so she elected to study recreation and sports management at Kenyatta University. This is where the arc of her career began pointing to a direction she had never originally imagined – sports consultancy. Five years later, Sharon, 27, is a sports journalist at Capital FM, a sports business consultant and columnist with the Business Daily and Forbes Africa magazine. So, what does sports consultancy entail? It involves many different things relating to sports activities such as events planning, media relations, logistics, technical team support, sports marketing and even security. My job is to manage all these aspects so I can deliver an exciting sporting experience to spectators and other stakeholders. Is it a lucrative career? ‘There is a great opportunity to make money within the industry. However, sports consultancy in Africa is tough because the industry is still in its nascent stages. There is still a lot of work to be done. Has she settled down in her new profession? I love this job, but it is a daily journey. I always strive to improve. Indeed, Sharon’s quest for personal growth is nearly infinite. She is a volunteer at Futbol Màs Kenya and is a member of the advisory board. This global organisation aims to educate and develop social values among children and adolescents in disadvantaged communities around the world. Sharon’s passion for sports is complemented by her love for storytelling. The need to tell stories that would otherwise end up untold is what motivates me to keep doing what I do. Such stories can inspire future generations of African sports lovers. To that effect, Sharon has chosen to invest extensively in sports communication. I like seeing children participate in sports. Encouraging them to keep playing is the best way to nurture their talent. And how does her volunteer work blend in with her day job? It has helped me understand values such as resilience, respect and teamwork which are essential in professional sports. These attributes make you a better person even outside work. Being in the sports arena makes me feel alive, happier and challenged every day. There’s always the desire to outdo myself, to be more involved and to make my contribution in the industry. On what she considers her biggest contribution to sports, Sharon effortlessly picks inclusivity. I have dedicated my radio shows and other initiatives to changing people’s perception on women’s involvement in sports, both as athletes and in its governance. I couldn’t be prouder to see more women joining the industry. Sharon admits that the cancellation and rescheduling of live sports events due to the Covid-19 pandemic threw her off balance. When the 2020 sports calendar was all but cancelled, I had to go back to the drawing board. Redrafting my strategy for 2021 has taken up a significant portion of time so far. I recently started conversations on Instagram with prominent figures in sports, something I’ve never done before. I engage athletes and administrators from around the world about the most pressing sports issues. This was meant to be an Olympics year. Athletes and organisers were all deep in preparations. Billions of dollars were spent, but the event had to be postponed, she laments. In five years, Sharon hopes to become a respected voice in sports advocacy.  She also intends to take up a more engaging sports leadership role. It’s my desire to raise the quality of local sports events, to encourage more people take up careers in sports, and to advance my education in sport management.