This week, the government announced that patients with mild or no symptoms of the coronavirus will be allowed to self-isolate and receive treatment at home. However, for this to work effectively, several experts including doctors have said that there is need for establishing proper surveillance and policing measures at the community level before implementing home-based care. Among the surveillance measures include proper care at home to minimise further spread of the virus to other members of the family or neighbours. Here are some of the guidelines that might be useful if you are receiving treatment at home: Know what self-isolating means Before anything else, it is important to know the difference between self-quarantine and self-isolating if you are receiving home-based care. Self-quarantine is when a person stays in place, whether at home or in quarantine centres for 14 days after being exposed to someone who has tested positive for the coronavirus. On the other hand, self-isolating is when a person who has started to show signs of the coronavirus or has tested positive separates himself or herself from others within the home or quarantine centre as they receive treatment. This means that the patient is in a separate room and does not share items such as utensils. Advice for patients: What to do when you are sick. Even if you are showing mild symptoms or have tested positive for the coronavirus but have no symptoms, you still need to self-isolate to protect others from catching the virus. Here are some of the guidelines that the Centres for Disease Control (CDC) says you should follow: Advice to care givers and other members in the home If you are caring for someone with the coronavirus at home, here is some guidelines that you can follow to ensure that you are safe and the patient receives adequate care: Changes to the home Because the coronavirus is highly infectious, there are certain changes that you will need to make in your home during self-isolation. Some of these changes include: