A month ago, Ms Mary Wangeci sought treatment for malaria at Kerugoya Referral Hospital, Kirinyaga County’s largest hospital. She ended up being referred to a nearby private laboratory for tests because the hospital one lacked reagents. Mr John Kinyua says he has been referred many times to private pharmacies dotting the area around the hospital to buys drugs. This on top of being kept waiting for hours by demoralised staff at the hospital. READ: Waiguru takes impeachment battle to court This sorry state of affairs is replicated in many of the public health facilities in the county, to the point that it has almost been accepted as the norm. CONGESTION The hospitals are also grappling with congestion, broken-down equipment and an acute shortage of drugs. When Governor Anne Waiguru took over leadership in 2017, health reform was one of her top priorities. She lamented the sector’s deplorable state, blaming the mess on former officials. But her own administration seems to have done little to salvage the situation. The Kerugoya hospital does not offer intensive care — residents who require it are referred to Embu. Seven dispensaries that were established by former Governor Joseph Ndathi’s administration are yet to be completed — Ms Waiguru recently directed new Health executive Gladys Njeri to ensure they are. On  Friday, Kenya Medical Practitioners, Pharmacists and Dentists Union Central region secretary-general Gor Goody told the Saturday Nation that Kerugoya hospital patients get poor services because the county fired 450 health workers. For the past three years, Dr Goody said, the health docket has been run down by the governor who has perennially denied them audience to discuss their grievances. INCINERATOR The Nation also independently verified that a public health report noted the incinerator at the facility was not operational, meaning hospital waste was being burned in the open. In addition, the hospital does not have a functioning laboratory due to lack of reagents, and X-ray procedures cannot be done, due to lack of films. “The governor ought to understand the economics of health such that if she fires a doctor with 10 years’ experience, it will take a long time to replace such a medic,” Dr Goody said. The medic’s stand on the county’s health sector was supported by Mutithi Ward Rep Baptista Kanga, who said his colleagues had toured the Kerugoya, Kimbimbi and Sagana health facilities and found patients being sent home without drugs. Mr Kanga explained that workers were unhappy because their salaries are always delayed. “The situation in our hospitals and dispensaries is serious and something urgent should be done to save the lives of our people. If an outbreak of Covid-19 occurs, it would be disastrous, because the level of preparedness is very low.” BUDGET COMMITTEE Separately, Mr David Mathenge, a member of the assembly’s Budget Committee, expressed concerns over delays in paying health workers. The workers are unable to engage effectively in the war against Covid-19, he said. It has also emerged that a difficult working environment is hampering health services. Last year, when medics went on strike, the Health executive at the time, Ms Agnes Gachoki, quit, accusing Ms Waiguru of frustrating her. “I can’t work under the current administration because it has been frustrating me when I’m carrying out my official duties,” she said then. She was replaced by Dr Njeri, who was unavailable for an interview.  While acknowledging that all is not well in the sector, Health Committee Chairman Fredrick Bundi defended Ms Waiguru against accusations that she is responsible for the mess. He said she had been working hard to reform the sector but the assembly frustrated her efforts. SH100 MILLION He noted that Sh100 million had been allocated in the supplementary budget for the construction of the Sh1.2 billion Kerugoya hospital complex, but ward reps reallocated it to ward development projects. “The same MCAs who impeached the governor had been placing hurdles to ensure that she doesn’t deliver on her mandate,” he said. The complex was to host an intensive care unit, a high dependency unit and other facilities, and see the hospital elevated to Level Five. Recently, Ms Waiguru asked how ward reps expected her to implement health projects when they were slashing the budget meant to fund them. She said it had also proved hard to hire health workers. But ward reps scoffed at her, saying it was ironic for her to lay off workers and then complain about a shortage.