The Nairobi City County government will employ additional workers as it seeks to boost its ageing workforce. The Nairobi County Public Service Board advertised for 1,498 positions. This will come as a relief to most Kenyans at a time when people have lost or are on the verge of losing their jobs due to the Covid-19 pandemic. The vacant positions include 800 security constables, 200 firefighters and 498 Early Childhood Development and Education (ECDE) caregivers. A similar recruitment was suspended in March due to the ongoing process of transfer of functions to the national government through Nairobi Metropolitan Service. APPLICATION DEADLINE “The Nairobi City County Public Service Board wishes to notify the general public of the resumption of the recruitment that were suspended in March, 2020. Suitably qualified candidates are therefore invited to apply,” read the advert. Applicants have been given until June 8, 2020 to submit their applications electronically with manual applications not allowed this time round. However, those who had applied in March need not to re-apply. Those applying for the county constable positions should be aged between 18 and 35 years, possess a KCSE certificate, be physically and medically fit and have no criminal record or pending criminal charges. Successful applicants will be responsible for maintaining law, order and regulations as directed. Applicants for county firemen or firewomen will also be required to have similar qualifications while possession of a relevant qualification from a reputable fire training school will be an added advantage. They will be responsible for performance of specialised functions in preparing and responding to fire and emergency calls, assisting in rescue operations during emergencies as well as operating appliances and communication equipment. STRETCHED WORKFORCE City Hall currently has a stretched workforce in this department with only 120 trained firefighters with 13 due to retire at the end of this year. This is after a plan to recruit 1,200 firefighters in 2018 flopped despite reports that they had even begun undergoing training. Those seeking to be employed as ECDE caregivers should possess KCSE certificates with a minimum grade of D+ (plus), a certificate in computer proficiency, be registered with the Teachers Service Commission as well as have a certificate in ECDE offered by KNEC/Ministry of Education or its approved equivalent. Successful applicants will be responsible for class teaching, organising and facilitating play and learning activities for the learners and managing ECDE classes among other responsibilities.