The Office of the Registrar of Political Parties was the centre of action Tuesday morning as two rival factions in Ford Kenya filed documents claiming to  be bona fide leaders of the party. A faction led by Kanduyi MP Wafula Wamunyinyi, who was on Sunday announced by the party’s special National Executive Council as the party leader, replacing Bungoma Senator Moses Wetang’ula presented their papers to the Registrar of Political Parties Anne Nderitu. Moments after they had left, a faction allied to Mr Wetang’ula arrived and filed their documents showing that he is still the party leader with Kiminini MP Dr Chris Wamalwa as secretary-general, replacing Tongaren MP Dr Eseli Simiyu. Dr Simiyu is allied to the Wamunyiyi faction. Ms Nderitu was not available for comment but Dr Simiyu confirmed about the filing of the party’s returns to show change of leadership. “We held a very successfully NEC meeting on Sunday which resolved to have the party leader and some officials replaced. Today we filed the returns of the NEC meeting with the office of the political parties’ registrar as required by the law,” Dr Simiyu said. But Dr Wamalwa disputed the claims by Dr Simiyu saying Mr Wetang’ula remains the party leader. “As we are talking Dr Simiyu and Mr Wamunyinyi are not party members. They can’t be officials of the party they do not belong to. "They were replaced as officials and immediately expelled from the party following a resolution of a NEC meeting,” Dr Wamalwa said. On Monday, Dr Wamalwa in a statement signed by 21 MPs from Western region, accused ODM leader Raila Odinga of bringing chaos in political parties. He also said that Dr Simiyu and Wamunyinyi are henchmen picked by Mr Odinga. “Together with their principals, they have hatched sinister agendas to wreak havoc in our political parties to disorganize us,” Dr Wamalwa said. “People presumed to be our own brothers and sisters are now agents of destruction of our people’s dreams,” he added. Ms Nderitu now has the onerous task of scrutinising the documents filed by the rival factions before making a pronouncement on the state of affairs in the Lion party.