National Assembly Speaker Justin Muturi has dealt a major blow to big political parties with large numbers in Parliament, saying they cannot use their numerical strength to deny smaller parties slots on House committees. Mr Muturi, in his notice to the House, also told bigger parties that they cannot de-whip members of smaller parties or independent MPs from various committees unless they have a political pact with them. The Speaker’s ruling is now going to be a major setback for Jubilee and ODM, which have been bullying members of smaller parties by de-whipping or threatening to de-whip them from committees if they don’t toe the party line. In a bid to be slotted to ‘lucrative’ committees, MPs who made it to Parliament either as independent candidates or through smaller parties have been aligning to either Jubilee, ODM or Wiper. The three parties, the only ones recognised as parliamentary parties, have therefore been using this window to exploit MPs from briefcase parties. ODM, for instance, de-whipped Ugenya MP David Ochieng from the Health Committee though the lawmaker belongs to the Movement for Democracy and Growth party, which has no political pact with Nasa or the Orange party. Standing Order 2 defines a parliamentary party as a party or a coalition of parties consisting of not less than five per cent of  the membership of the National Assembly,  which is essentially 18 members. However, the Speaker, in his ruling, noted that the Constitution only recognises a political party and does not distinguish between parliamentary parties and other parties. “To interpret therefore that members from parties other than parliamentary parties should be disfranchised due to their few numbers in the House is not in the Constitution,” Mr Muturi said. “It cannot be therefore that independent members who are democratically elected representatives should be excluded from sitting on committees on the basis that they do not belong to a parliamentary party,” he added The Speaker pointed out that no rule or interpretation can be used to take away, disadvantage, limit, stifle or restrict what the Constitution has laid out in plain and clear terms. Mr Muturi noted that discharging a member from committees on the basis that one does not belong to a parliamentary party will amount to denying an MP his right to exercise his core constitutional mandate, which includes representation, oversight, legislation, participation in the budget-making process and vetting appointees for public office. “It is erroneous to advance the idea that committees are a preserve of parliamentary parties to the exclusion of the independent members and members belonging to small parties,” he added. Mr Muturi said no parliamentary party has the right to discharge from a committee any member that does not belong to it. “No parliamentary party may discharge a member unless the member belongs to or formally affiliates with the parliamentary party by way of a coalition agreement as contemplated under the Political Parties Act.” Standing Order 173 provides that the committee on selection, in consultation with parliamentary parties, will nominate members who will serve on a select committee. “We are alive to the fact that not all parties represented in the House met the threshold for being recognised as parliamentary parties,” he said. Majority Leader Aden Duale said there are smaller parties that have not signed any coalition agreement with Jubilee but benefited from the committee slots belonging to the party, saying they must now either sign the pact or they will not be given committee assignments. Minority Leader John Mbadi said the ruling is a disadvantage to the parliamentary parties as they will have to belong to the same number of committees to their counterparts in smaller parties. He warned MPs from smaller parties not to celebrate yet. “The selection committee is going to look a fresh at the allocation of committees. Yes they are going to get committees but the best they will get is catering,” Mr Mbadi said. Homa Bay Town MP Peter Kaluma said the Speaker’s ruling looks at Kenya as a mature democratic State, which he said is not the case. “With this ruling, independent candidates should be out of oversight committees. They should be taken to sports committee and catering services,” he said. Deputy Minority Leader Robert Mbui said the ruling will open a Pandora’s box as members belonging to bigger political parties can be de-whipped while those in smaller parties cannot. Suba North MP Millie Odhiambo said the ruling is a challenge to bigger parties to exercise internal democracy, pointing out that some of the independent MPs were members of the bigger parties but left. There are 21 parties with representation in the National Assembly, out of which only three met the threshold of a parliamentary party. The Jubilee party has 172 members, Kanu 10, and Party for Development nd Reforms (PDR) four, bringing the total to 186 The Nasa coalition, comprising the Orange Democratic Movement, Wiper Democratic Movement, Amani National Congress, Chama Cha Mashinani and Chama Cha Uzalendo Party, have a combined total of 126 members. Records from the Registrar of Political Parties show that there are 12 other parties with representation in the National Assembly that do not belong to any coalition. These include the Economic Freedom Party, which has five members, Maendeleo Chap Chap with four members, Kenya National Congress (KNC), People’s Democratic Party (PDP) and Kenya Patriots Party, each with two members. Other parties with one member each in the National Assembly are Democratic Party (DP), Party of National Unity (PNU),  the Frontier Alliance Party (FAP), the National Agenda Party of Kenya (NAPK), the New Democrats party and Muungano party. Although these parties by definition are not parliamentary parties, they have a combined membership of 22, plus 14 independent ones, bringing their total to 36. There are 622 committee slots, which ideally should be shared among members in a fair and transparent manner. In the ruling, therefore, the Jubilee coalition is entitled to 330 slots, to be shared between members of the affiliate parties. Nasa is entitled to 226 slots, to be shared among its affiliate parties The Economic Freedom Party is entitled to eight slots, shared among its five members. PDP, Kenya Patriots Party and KNC with two members each, are entitled to four slots each. Maendeleo Chap Chap is entitled to seven slots to be shared amongst its seven members. The FAP, PNU, DP, NAPK, Muungano party, New Democrats and the Movement for Democracy and Growth, with one member each, are entitled to two slots per party The 14 independent candidates in the House will share out 25 slots in committees.