Nominated Senator Isaac Mwaura has won global recognition for his relentless work and contribution in fighting for the rights of vulnerable children in Kenya and across the world. Mr Mwaura was the only Kenyan on the list of 11 superheroes this year honoured by Terre Des Hommes, a Netherlands-based international organisation. The recognition was made on June 5, 2020, but was announced on June 12, 2020, to coincide with the International Day Against Child Labour celebrations. Mr Mwaura, who is the vice chairman of the Senate committee on Finance and Budget, described the award as a great honour. “When we serve humanity with all our hearts, we don’t think some people notice. I am committed to make change even when no one is noticing. The joy to serve and put a smile on someone’s face keeps me going,” he said Monday. CHILDREN’S RIGHTS Terres Des Homes is famous for advocating the rights of children against any form of child abuse – sexual exploitation, child trafficking and child labour among others – by providing homes among other emergency assistance. Among those recognised alongside the senator include the 2014 Nobel peace laureate Kailash Satyarthi from India. Mr Mwaura is the first MP with albinism in the history of Kenya and chairs the Albinism Society of Kenya. He also chairs the advisory board of Innovate Now, a global disability innovation hub that seeks to develop assistive technologies to improve the lives of children and adults with disabilities. “One thing that I have come to accept is that if you are from a group considered disadvantaged, your success or failure will be attributed to your condition or status. “Some people can't see you beyond their limitations of what they think you are. Don't borrow their lenses in order to see yourself,” Mr Mwaura noted. CHALLENGE TO KENYANS He challenged Kenyans to self-define and “tell and show the world of what stuff you are made off”. “Don't get too fussy by your failures and also don't be shy about your achievements. You are on a mission, a noble one,” he added. The nominated senator also founded the Kenya Disability Parliamentary Association, the first caucus of its kind that brings together representatives of persons with disabilities in the Kenyan parliament to advance their rights. He is known for advocating for intersex children to be recognised in Kenya through his petition and legislation in Parliament and has helped found the Intersex Persons Society of Kenya (IPSK), the most significant organisation of intersex persons in Africa. He also pushed for the admission of students with disabilities to the university at a lower grade as an affirmative action.