Mandera Governor Ali Roba has launched the second round of relief food distribution to cushion locals from the effects of Covid-19 and floods. Mr Roba Wednesday flagged off trucks ferrying 259 tons of rice, beans and vegetable oil to be given to 13,252 vulnerable families. Also targeted to benefit from the relief rations whose monthly distribution started in April are Dugsi teachers (Islamic education teachers), people living with HIV/Aids and internally displaced persons. "The county’s economic hardship time is occasioned by Covid-19, the closure of the borders between Ethiopia and Somalia and lockdown within the county and country that has negatively interrupted the communities’ livelihoods and significantly affected the food prices for low income earners and zero income families," Mr Roba said. The Mandera County government, Mr Roba said, supplied relief rations to 22,149 families along the riverine from Border Point 1 to Malkamari in April and May. The June supplies that were flagged off outside the county headquarters in Mandera town included 6,625 bags of 25Kgs of rice, 1060 bags of 50kgs of beans and 2,209 cartons of 18 litres of cooking oil. BENEFICIARIES In Mandera East sub-county, some 1,850 most vulnerable families are to get the donations. Others are 541 teachers, 1,623 special groups of people living with HIV/Aids, non-locals and fire victims. In Lafey, those who will benefit are 800 needy families, 123 teachers and 30 special groups’ members. In Banissa, 800 needy families, 30 special needs members and 285 teachers are to get the food. In Mandera South, some 640 vulnerable families are to get the rations. Others are 370 teachers and 30 special groups’ members. In Kutulo, 500 poor families, 250 teachers and 30 special needs members will get the relief supplies. In Mandera West, 800 families are targeted under the June countywide emergency relief food distribution, also 300 teachers and 30 special needs families. In Mandera North, 800 families, 300 teachers and 30 special groups’ members will get the rations. WELL-WISHERS THANKED Mr Roba thanked Direct Aid International which is based in Kuwait and their African Muslim Agency for donating 20 tons of relief supplies to Mandera East residents and urged other non-state actors to emulate this good gesture at a time when the coronavirus is adversely affecting many livelihoods. The governor said "immense" measures are needed to save locals’ lives due to effects of Covid-19, floods and other disasters. Parts of Mandera bordering River Daua suffered major floods in May leaving hundreds of people displaced and their houses and farms washed away. Mandera County is one of the counties that reported first index cases of the coronavirus in April and was placed under lockdown due to increased cases. It is also considered a hotspot due to its porous border with Somalia and Ethiopia. But Governor Roba’s administration has recorded tremendous success in fighting the pandemic due to its preparedness and crucial intervention measures that have resulted to 17 out of 18 Covid-19 patients being discharged after testing negative. More than 700 people in the county have been tested for Covid-19. Governor Roba has appealed to the national government to release money allocated to the county to fight the pandemic and its effects on locals, adding that the region is still at risk of the spread of the virus.