A private developer is constructing a standard World Athletics track in the outskirts of Kitale town, Trans Nzoia County.  The facility located next to All Saints Academy, which will be known as Ndura Sports Complex, is expected to serve sportspeople in the region and talented schoolchildren. Once complete, the sports complex will cut costs for athletes seeking standard training facilities. The ran down Kenyatta Stadium a few kilometres away, which is under the Trans Nzoia County Government, has made it difficult for athletes to train.  Athletes have been digging deep in their pockets to access proper training grounds.  Former sprinter Ndura Kaiburi, is the brains behind the sports complex. He told Nation Sport that for a long time, athletes, his son included, suffered for lack of a stadium. The sports complex, which will cost Sh30 million, will have  hostels that accommodate 80-100 people of both genders and  a modern gymnasium. So far, Sh20 million has been used on excavation works, levelling of the field, and building of the drainage have been done. The 72-year-old Ndura, who was a former athlete, said that he thought about starting the project 25 years ago and his dream is almost coming to pass. “I was a sprinter during my days. We were given cups and plates when we won races, but now things have changed. The sports complex is a dream I had 25 years ago, I’m glad it is taking shape,” the 72-year-old Ndura said. He has contracted Kenya Seed Company to plant grass at the complex which will also have a football pitch. Ndura criticised officials who embezzled money meant for building sports facilities. It is frustrating for the youth who are eyeing a career in sports, he said. Ndura’s son, Philip, also a former sprinter-turned-coach said the project comes at a time when there is dire need of stadiums. “When I was a sprinter, I struggled because of lack of facilities. The project my father is working on will help upcoming athletes,” he said.  “We have a small team of sprinters, with time  we expect the number to grow. I’m targeting to have athletes from  the 100 metres to 1,500m in camp.” Upcoming athlete, Stella Aspitar, said she is happy about the project. “Training has been a challenge. My target is to make the Kenyan team for the World Under-20 Athletics Championships which was postponed to a later date owing to the coronavirus ,” Aspitar said. She was among junior athletes who received food aid distributed by Athletics Kenya last week.