A hundred days since the first Covid-19 case was reported in the country, a new survey shows that Kenyans feel overwhelmed and want virus restrictions lifted. This is even as the increasing number of coronavirus cases dim hopes of the government lifting the restrictions to reopen the economy anytime soon. A poll released Sunday by Infotrak shows that Kenyans are stressed and financially overburdened by the restrictions. “With increasing unemployment, underemployment, threats to job security and salary cuts, most Kenyans have come to terms with the economic impact of the pandemic,” said Mr Walter Nyabundi, the Special Projects and Loyalty Research Manager at Infotrak Research and Consulting. STRESS The survey shows that most people are unable to make ends meet, a situation that is causing stress. According to the research, 41 per cent of Kenyans view the coronavirus as a personal financial issue, while 35 percent see it as both a personal financial and health matter. The results of the poll, conducted between May 28 and June 2, show that financial and psychological burden has taken a toll on the majority of Kenyans. Most people are finding it difficult to pay rent. Eighty seven per cent of Kenyans who took part in the poll said the cost of food had gone up while 68 percent said they were unable to buy adequate fuel — kerosene, gas and charcoal — for use at home. PAY RENT “Seventy nine per cent said they can no longer remit money to dependants back at home, while 67 percent are unable to pay for utilities like electricity and water,” said Mr Nyabundi. At the same time, the study shows that 74 per cent of Kenyans living in urban areas are unable to pay their rent on time while 72 per cent said could not pay their house rents in full. Nationally, 63 per cent of Kenyans are unable to pay their rent on time while 60 per cent said they are unable to pay their rent in full. The study shows that 75 per cent of Kenyans have defaulted on payments of formal and informal loans while 67 per cent cannot buy medicine. “Fifty four percent of employed Kenyans also stated that they are facing financial challenges because their salaries were reduced while 47 per cent of all Kenyans intimated that they are currently depending on food donation from well-wishers,” said Mr Nyabundi. According to the study, most Kenyans said they were yet to benefit from reduction of VAT from 16 to 14 per cent — with 79 per cent being the employed, followed by the retired (73 percent) and the unemployed at 71 per cent. As such, the majority of Kenyans (81 per cent) are anxious and stressed.  Out of the respondents, 68 per cent said they felt confused while 63 per cent felt trapped. CONFUSED The study also found that 61 per cent felt lonely, 52 per cent felt helpless, 36 per cent felt mistreated while 33 per cent said they felt angry. The research established that Kenyans are no longer consuming news regarding Covid-19 as they used to when the first cases were reported, with 78 per cent of the respondents saying they find news on the pandemic stressful while 48 per cent said they found it confusing. About 49 per cent of the respondents said the news is repetitive and boring, 46 percent said the news was complicated and eight percent said the news is exaggerated.