The Kenya Wildlife Service (KWS) has captured a stray lion that killed livestock at Lake Amu in Mpeketoni, Lamu County. Lamu County KWS Senior Warden Mathias Mwavita on Saturday confirmed to Nation that his officers captured the animal after setting a trap in Lake Amu Village where it had killed and injured livestock. Before it was captured, the animal had already killed four cows in the area. “This morning, KWS officers have captured a lion that has been killing livestock at Lake Amu. A few days ago, the cat had killed four cows and terrorised residents. It was captured just days after my officers laid a trap within Lake Amu,” said Mr Mwavita. BONI FOREST He said KWS had already transferred the lion to their Jamhuri Camp in Hindi as they prepare to take it to Tsavo National Park. The KWS Jamhuri Camp is an animal orphanage in Lamu County. The lion is believed to have travelled from Boni Forest. Mr Mwavita thanked members of the public for their cooperation, particularly their efforts in giving information that has enabled roaming animals to be either driven out or captured by KWS rangers in the region. He said recently, they captured several hyenas in Bar’goni, Mkunumbi and other areas within Lamu West and safely disoriented them in Tana River. The KWS Senior Warden appealed to residents to continue provid-ing information that would assist the KWS team in Lamu on their hunt-ing mission for roaming wildlife. “We’ve set more than five traps in places like Lamu Island, Manda Is-land, Faza, Bar’goni, Mkunumbi and Lake Amu. Our intention is to trap all stray lions, leopards and hyenas in those areas. We’re aware that once the animals are spotted in villages, locals always kill or poison them. We appeal to them to give information to KWS so that the animals are traced and captured or driven out. We want to have them safely disorientated to Tsavo National Park. We can’t take them back to Dodori National Re-serve in Boni Forest since it’s near and they can easily trace their way back to peoples’ homes,” said Mr Mwavita. RELIEF The capture of the lion is a relief for the residents of Lake Amu and the entire Mpeketoni Division since its presence had greatly affected their day-to-day activities, including farming and livestock grazing. Mr Julius Kimani, a resident in Mpeketoni said the lion was giving them sleepless nights. “We’ve been spotting the lion here from time to time. Sometimes it just appears to kill or injure our livestock. We’re happy that it has finally been captured,” said Mr Kimani. Mrs Tabitha Wanjiku, who had lost four cows,called on the KWS to compensate them. In September, 2019, three lions invaded Manda-Maweni Village in Lamu West and killed ten goats and two donkeys. The KWS later succeeded in driving out the three lions back to Boni-Dodori National Reserve.