If a foreigner were to point at Kenya on a map, the first thing that would come to mind is the natural beauty and diverse wildlife. Tourists come to Kenya each year for a safari experience, and an exciting trip to the coast. And with the coronavirus pandemic preventing cross-border travel, it is likely that we will be taking stock of our country anew and spending more time enjoying what the land has to offer. It is important that we take the necessary measures to protect our environment.    GLOBAL WARMING As a developing nation, we bear the brunt of global warming and decades-long effects of environmental degradation due to industrialisation. But it is important to enact environment-positive policies to prevent future damages. Our children deserve to enjoy the same clean and beautiful coasts, national parks, cities and villages.  And fortunately, we have a government that cares about environmental conservation.   The government’s policy regarding environmental protection has a lot to do with waste reduction and elimination of plastic waste.  Before the plastic bag ban, we were used to seeing bags flying around the streets, in the gutters, gathering in piles around children’s play grounds. Since the ban, many unscrupulous traders have been arrested and fined.   Lamu, with its beautiful Swahili architecture, pristine white shores and warm blue water, is an attraction for Kenyans and foreigners alike. ENVIRONMENTAL CONSERVATION However, like many other communities in Kenya, the past few decades have seen a surge in the amount of plastic and other non-recyclable wastes gathering in piles on the seafront. That is what inspired Ali Skanda, the founder of the Takataka Foundation, to begin involving the community in environmental conservation.   The foundation focuses on education, clean-ups, and infrastructural improvement. No plastic is produced in Lamu, yet it all comes in with visitors, traders and travellers. This waste threatens the magnificence of the island and its wildlife. But by teaching the community about these threats, Skanda is changing the relationship that Kenyans have with their environment. While the foundation focuses on the effect of plastic waste on humans and the health of the ecosystem, it offers a holistic way for people to learn about what they can do. This form of community participation serves as a great example for how Kenyans can contribute to environmental conservation. The government’s policies are helpful but they cannot take us the whole way. While the ban prevents us from using plastics, we also have to reduce general waste.  Few feelings in this world are more satisfying than feeling that you have done something to improve the community. The benefits will be enjoyed for generations to come.  Mr Cherambos comments on topical issues. Michaelcherambos1@gmail.com