In a record 22 minutes, Garissa Township MP Aden Duale lost his position as the majority leader in the National Assembly. The Jubilee Party Parliamentary Group meeting on Monday at KICC brought together 174 lawmakers who sealed the fate of Mr Duale, who had served as majority leader for seven years. Whereas a majority of MPs from both factions in Jubilee heaped praise on Mr Duale for his outstanding performance, the Nation has learnt that pressure from close allies of the President, questions over Mr Duale’s loyalty especially on President Kenyatta’s pet subject — BBI, and his attack on government officers in April on the floor of the House, might have sealed his fate. BAD BLOOD The Nation has learned that the Garissa Township MP developed bad blood with a majority of lawmakers allied to President Kenyatta due to his stand on the Building Bridges Initiative (BBI) and handshake. He even skipped a BBI rally in his constituency early this year. According to Gatanga MP Joseph Nduati and his Cherang’any counterpart Joshua Kuttuny, Mr Duale has undermined the Head of State by opposing the Uhuru-Raila dalliance and BBI hence he could no longer be trusted with the government’s agenda. Being the first holder of the office after the promulgation of the 2010 Constitution, one might conclude that Mr Duale was cut out for the job. STAUNCH ALLY Those against Mr Duale claimed he is a staunch DP ally, who pretended to support the President during the day. Mr Duale remained tight-lipped on his next move, but sources indicate he will give a comprehensive statement today on the floor of the House. In a statement, Mr Duale said during his tenure, he was able to diligently push the agenda of Jubilee government effectively and oversaw the passage of over 200 Bills and 500 Motions. “Today marks the end of my seven years of service to the great people of Kenya as the Leader of Majority of the National Assembly,” he said, adding that he is leaving office with a smile and pride owing to his achievements. Deputy President William Ruto, in a tweet, praised Mr Duale for his passion and loyalty. “My brother Aden Duale, you are a great leader. For the last eight years, you discharged your responsibilities as our party’s first majority leader with style, precision, passion and loyalty. My friend, when parliamentary history is written, you will have a chapter. Mbele iko sawa na Mungu,” the DP tweeted. Kieni MP Kanini Kega, who was the architect of the removal of Mr Duale, said he has nothing personal against the former majority leader, but time had come to pass over the baton. “This is like a relay, even if you are the best runner, you must pass the baton to the next person. Mr Duale should be thankful he held that position for eight years,” Mr Kega said yesterday. Murang’a Woman Rep Sabina Chege said Mr Duale had done a great job in the years he has served as majority leader, pointing out that under his leadership, government has not lost any motion or bill in parliament. Kipipiri MP Amos Kimunya, who was chosen to replace Mr Duale, said he would like to see the whole Jubilee fraternity working together to achieve the objectives of the party “I know his commitment. He is still big asset in this country and we will continue to use his experience and expertise,” he said. Mr Kimunya pointed out that yesterday’s meeting had no room for members to engage, saying there will be another meeting where members will have an opportunity to raise other issues. Additional reporting by Onyango Kónyango