Governor Anne Waiguru has filed responses to all the allegations the Kirinyaga County Assembly levelled against her. Lawyer Kamotho Waiganjo, who is also the governor’s spouse, led the legal team that submitted the responses to the Office Clerk of the Senate Saturday, with a promise of battle royale next week. “We have filed all responses substantive to all the charges levelled against the governor,” he told the media on Saturday, moments after he filed the responses. 40 CARTONS He was accompanied by lawyer Paul Nyamodi. “The responses are contained in 40 cartons and it is unfortunate to the people of Kirinyaga that the matter reached here. We shall let the Senate do its work,” he said. “We look forward to the hearing next week.” The Senate formed an 11-member special committee, chaired by Kakamega Senator Cleophas Malala, to investigate the governor and establish whether the claims against her are valid. The committee has issued summons Kirinyaga Speaker Anthony Gathumbi to appear before it on Tuesday to shed light on the allegations that led to the impeachment of the governor. The county assembly will be the first to argue its case when the committee starts its formal sittings on Tuesday. In a letter dated June 17 addressed to Mr Gathumbi, the committee advised the Speaker that at least three MCAs could accompany him during the proceedings. IMPEACHMENT The committee also told the Speaker to provide 20 hard copies of the documents, which it will rely on while looking into Ms Waiguru’s impeachment. Further, the county assembly is required to furnish the committee with names of possible witnesses to give evidence on the matter. However, the committee warned that the proceedings would go on should Mr Gathumbi fail to attend. “Take note that should you choose not to appear before the committee on the date and time specified in this letter, then the committee and thereafter the Senate shall proceed with this matter in accordance with the Constitution without further reference to you,” the letter said. The MCAs impeached the governor on two counts of gross violation of the Constitution and abuse of office. The MCAs impeached the governor on two charges of gross violation of the Constitution, citing failure to deliver the annual state of the county address, undermining the assembly, violations under written law, including violation of the Public Procurement and Asset Disposal Act, 2015 and the Public Finance and Management Act.