BAD BLOOD: A trend has emerged in the counties in which deputy governors hardly ever accompany or sit next to their bosses at public functions, notes Francis Njuguna, without naming names. This, he adds, shows lack of a cordial working relationship between the two top officials, who should be coordinating and discharging their official duties. Ideally, the Kiambu County resident states, the deputies should represent governors at functions the latter are unable to attend but that’s not possible when the two are not working closely together. There are not many of the 47 governors who make use of their deputies at official functions, he concludes. His contact is osnjuguna@yahoo.com.***DRY TAPS: Nearly 20 per cent of Nairobi residents have been without water for more than four weeks as the Sasumua Dam, a major source of the city’s supply, was being repaired, says Ruth Ndesandjo. “What are we supposed to do? Water cartels are very happy (probably backed by corrupt politicians and businessmen) as we suffer.” This, she adds, is a case of “water, water everywhere, even near lakes all over Kenya, and yet we are without water”. Incidentally, it comes at a time when hygiene is so important because of the coronavirus pandemic. Her contact is madariruth@gmail.com.***PARCHED WESTLANDS: Also reeling under a serious water supply hitch is Yatin Shah, a resident of General Mathenge Road in the otherwise plush Westlands suburb of Nairobi. Declaring this a really serious issue, Yatin says that in the past three or so weeks he and his neighbours have received water only three times, or rather, once a week “and that even for almost one hour only each time”. He finds this really frustrating. “It is very expensive to hire or buy from a water bowser. “Can the Nairobi Water and Sewerage Company, please, do something about this problem? For how long are they going to make us suffer like this?” His contact is yshah700@yahoo.com.***TRAVEL ADVISORIES: With America literally burning, amid violent protests targeting police cars and stations across the vast country following the brutal police killing of an African-American man, George Floyd, Jim Webo is impressed with the restraint and sober reaction of the African countries. Says he: “The US government and other nations in the West are notorious for rushing to issue travel advisories, warning their citizens not to visit African countries whenever there are riots that are nowhere near what we are seeing in America today. I hope the Americans will learn from this and shun blanket actions against other nations.”***DISCO-LIGHT POWER: Calling Kenya Power is Dr Victor Isadia, on behalf of his fellow residents of Ruiru East (Murera Ndururumo). Says Dr Isadia: “When our lights are on, they are dim or play like disco lights. Food in the fridges has all gone bad, our one-day chicks are dying of cold and expensive temperature-sensitive drugs are going to waste.” Most disheartening for him is his giraffe meat from a client, which will rot without him tasting it. “I’m pained at a missed opportunity of a lifetime to have such a precious bite. Kenya Power, kindly come and repair the transformer at Ndururumo Primary School.” His contact is vickyisadiah@gmail.com.***ABANDONED: With the increasing online shopping owing to its convenience, Jumia Online has been a reliable source of merchandise but James Gakuo is having some misgivings. The firm, he charges, has not been at its best since the coronavirus pandemic set in with its lockdowns. Says he: “Jumia just has to wake up. You cannot use the coronavirus to say that customer care will not be available. I thought organisations, as a basic minimum, have one employee to address urgent issues. I’m still trying to track a gadget which I purchased a month ago.” His contact is gakks2002@yahoo.com. Have an available day, won’t you!