Nakuru County Assembly Rules and Delegated Legislation committee has made amendments to the House Standing Orders to support the fight against Covid-19. The amendments, which were unanimously approved by the House, will affect the way the various committees conduct their proceedings during the pandemic period. The amended rules allow Speaker Joel Kairu Maina to invoke the provision of alternative sitting arrangements which permit the committees to conduct sittings either virtually or physically. “The Speaker, upon the recommendation of the Assembly Rules and Delegated Legislation Committee, prescribe guidelines governing conduct of committee meetings, manner of voting, and ascertainment of a vote in the meeting,” reads the recommendations. COMMITTEE MEETINGS The Speaker will also prescribe the conduct of members during meetings and access to the committee meetings by members of the public and the media. The Speaker will also issue guidelines on public participation and involvement, etiquette and such other matters that may be relevant to the conduct of the committee meetings. However, these guidelines are not permanent and may cease to apply upon revocation by the Speaker or cessation of the exceptional such as pandemic whichever is earlier. A member or any other person required to appear before the committee or produce any documents under the standing orders or any written law may submit such documents electronically. During this time of pandemic, the House will conduct its virtual proceedings using an appropriate information and communication technology platform. PHYSICAL SITTINGS “The technology platform shall incorporate video, audio, text and allow the participation of members in the proceedings in real time and the broadcast of the proceedings,” read the recommendations. The platform will also facilitate the proceedings to be recorded and transcribed under Standing Order 222 and allow members to vote in the absence of physical sittings. The voting system incorporated shall be simple, accurate, verifiable, secure, accountable and transparent and facilitate the prompt declaration of the result of each vote taken. “The clerk shall facilitate the participation of member in virtual proceedings through the use of standard electronic devices specifically configured for the proceedings,” concluded the recommendations.