 The people must also be sensitised to ensure social distancing and wear masks in public places to keep the virus at bay. Leaders right across the country deserve kudos for contributing to the fight against the coronavirus pandemic. After all, how else could they have shown their dedication to protecting their people without joining in this campaign? Any leader worth his or her salt cannot ignore such a grave threat to the people who have given them the mandate to hold those lofty positions. As the incidence of infections increases, we have seen governors and other elected leaders join the efforts to enforce the safety guidelines to curb the spread of the deadly virus. RESPIRATORY DISEASE As the Ministry of Health has demonstrated, success in keeping the deadly respiratory disease at bay will depend largely on maintaining a high level of hygiene by regularly washing hands with soap. This is will only be possible if water is made available and soap or sanitisers provided.  The people must also be sensitised to ensure social distancing and wear masks in public places to keep the virus at bay. Also deserving praise are the politicians and other well-wishers, who are digging into their own pockets to buy these essential gadgets for the people. However, this is where something unbecoming has been noticed. This is the tendency by some unscrupulous politicians to pursue self-gain from the misery that has been visited on fellow Kenyans by this disease. ASSIST THE NEEDY  It is a shame that some people brand the items for their own political promotion instead of a genuine desired to assist the needy. It is worse where public funds are being used to acquire these gadgets, which are then branded with the leaders’ portraits and names. Some MPs have done the same, as the Ethics and Anti-Corruption Commission (EACC) has warned. It is encouraging to hear that the EACC is monitoring this and the culprits will not be allowed to go scot-free. They cannot use public funds for their selfish ends. If they must use the items for political campaigns, they should spend their own money. But even if this were the case, it would still smack of unforgivable callousness.