Bungoma Governor Wycliffe Wangamati has told Senator Moses Wetang’ula to forget about Ford Kenya party leadership, saying his ouster is now a done deal. Speaking in Kimilili, Mr Wangamati told the Bungoma senator to accept that he was duly ousted by members as the party leader and should stop wasting time in the courts. The governor was among a group of leaders from Bungoma who kicked out Mr Wetang’ula last month. “I want to tell (Mr) Wetang’ula that matters of Ford Kenya party leadership were done and dusted and he should sit back and allow other people to lead him,” he said. In an escalation of a feud between the two, Mr Wangamati alleged that Mr Wetang’ula had used the same tactics to oust his predecessor Musikari Kombo and that he should quit in peace. MEMBERS JUSTIFIED He said Ford Kenya members were justified in throwing out Mr Wetang’ula, adding that the decision was reached after soul-searching and proper consultations. “I want to assure Ford Kenya members that all is well,” said Mr Wangamati. He said and it is only matter of time before the new leadership starts revamping the party. The governor fell out with the senator last year despite being in the same camp in the last elections. A faction led by Kanduyi MP Wafula Wamunyinyi, his Tongaren counterpart Eseli Simiyu and Mr Wangamati on May 31 led a coup that saw the ousting of Mr Wetang’ula as the party leader. In reaction, Mr Wetang’ula announced that the group had been kicked out of the party. DISMISSED COUP He also dismissed the coup, saying it was influenced by forces outside the party. He pointed an accusing finger at Devolution Cabinet Secretary Eugene Wamalwa, Cotu boss Francis  Atwoli and ODM leader Raila Odinga. He later moved to the High Court where he successfully blocked the changes pending the hearing and determination of the case. Judge James Makau set the case for mention on July 9. This was after the other group led by Mr Wamunyinyi raised an objection, arguing that the court had no jurisdiction to hear the case.