Mr Nickson Mwirigi started volunteering at his church after graduating with a Bachelor of Science from the University of Eldoret. He used his time as a volunteer to nurture his love in creative arts; today he’s Opera News country’s senior audiovisuals editor. The 31 –year-old visual enthusiast and a keen student of management shared his story with Life&Style. “I was born in a military hospital, my dad was an army soldier in the 90s, and we lived in Kabete Barrack off Waiyaki Way in my early years. As soon as I joined the primary school, we moved to Kenyatta National Hospital Estate, where I spent most of my 8-4-4 years. My folksmoved to Athi River later on, where my mom resides till now. I have three siblings; of which I am the last born. We all went to public schools, which was quite interesting. I studied at Shadrack Kimalel Primary school, which lies just next to Kibra and joined Tambach High school. Mr Mwirigi pictured on his secondary school days. PHOTO| COURTESY Then, later on, I joined Moi University for my undergraduate studies. Later on in my second year, the campus became a full-fledged University and thus changing its name to the University of Eldoret. EARLY YEARS I graduated from the University of Eldoret with a Bachelor of Science degree. I knew I was not going to be a scientist, so I decided to pursue my passion which is in the creative arts. I had started learning 3D modelling and had already mastered Photoshop and Adobe illustrator from the comfort of my campus hostel by watching YouTube tutorials. It was quite clear to me what I wanted to pursue next. After graduation, I enrolled at Shang Tao Media Arts College for a Higher National Diploma course in 3D Animation and Media Studies. That is where I learnt video editing and after effects which would later define my career. Mr Mwirigi on his graduation day. PHOTO| COURTESY I started putting my skills to practice by serving in my hometown church Mavuno Hill City in Athi River. I would help out in creating graphics for the church displays screens and any other work they needed to be done.  MY BREAK My break came when one of the fellow congregants who was also serving in the church needed an extra graphics designer in his firm, Silver Ball Africa. That’s when I was introduced to my first boss, Mr Paushinski or Pau. Working at Silver Ball Africa was a good growth experience since I found myself creating graphics for brands I never thought I would get to work with at that point in my career; it was baptism by fire. I consolidated my graphic design skills. Months later, I decided to venture in freelance design work and test my business skills. This didn’t work according to plan; I was overworking myself and getting little returns. I should have learnt a bit more about market rate and value for my work, having a tax compliance business and also saving up since cooperate gigs have a stretched payment period. I was forced back to employment, so I went online and saw some opportunities that required my skills and started applying. In the creative field, a resume should always be accompanied by proof of work, also known as a show reel, so I sent my show reel, and eventually, I got some offers. I was invited to interview for a position as a Video Editor at Box raft Ltd ran by one of Kenya’s Digital Media genius, that’s the simplest way I can describe Mr Robert Ndungu. He first needed to get video editors with highly creative minds and critical thinking skills; then the next phase was rigorous training and understanding digital media concepts and ethics. After the training, we were introduced to the new concept of Digital Viral Videos. It was a new thing at the time, no one was doing professional level in the country, and we had only AJ+, ran by Aljazeera, as a reference at the time. A few months after the training, I was up and running, creating highly viral videos and started developed a keen interest in how digital videos work on the online space. When we started, we were only two. My colleague later on the left to pursue his passion in the entertainment scene, he is now a very successful DJ at NRG Radio. Getting a replacement for him was a real task, owing to the nature of skill, creativity and critical thinking ability the job needed, which is something that I learnt to look out for and still guides my recruiting process even now. MILLIONS OF VIEWS Eventually, the department grew as the company expanded to commercialise viral videos and live-streaming. I delved even deeper learning patterns and user habits and grounding myself in digital videos; my videos would generate millions of view each time they published. Furthermore, we were among the first new media companies, outside legacy media to carry out multi-camera live streams at events anywhere in the country at any time. My responsibilities grew as the team became more prominent and firmer. A few years later I rose to lead the video department which was handling a broad scope of productions ranging from digital videos and news, digital adverts for top corporate brands in the country, on-location multi-camera live streams and documentaries for local and international organisations. I was taken through constant management training that saw my position rise again to assistant operations manager in the company, expanding my scope to a wider variety of digital products apart from just videos. My experience at Box raft enabled me to travel across Africa while handling some of the most sensitive and massive projects ever in my career. It taught me people management skills and most importantly, a deep unrivalled understanding of digital videos that set the path for my career trajectory. The management and digital skills I have acquired over the years propelled me to lead an even larger team as a consultant at Opera software where I am the country’s senior audiovisuals editor for Opera News, international news and videos app. JOINING THE DOTS In my career journey, what I remember most is the entire growth process has been a series of joining the dots from one point to the other. I remember there was a point where I was unsure about my career choice, it really looked bleak and hopeless, and it seemed like there wasn’t any real chance of getting a meaningful future. Right now, the digital space has grown, and there’s a lot of room for growth and immense possibilities. The major decision that stands out to me more than normal operational decisions that I make daily is my career move from Box raft to consult at Opera. It was one of the most difficult decisions I have had to make in my career, but new experiences bring growth, and I must say I experience growth every day. My key driver of growth has been taking the initiative. I love doing what I do, and my mantra is to strive to be the best you can be. I seek to make a difference and leaving a mark in all organisations I work with. Striving to be the best will see you leaving the office the last, I guess that’s a downside to it. I always ask myself, would I want an employee like me, if my answer is no, then it means I need to put more effort if my answer is yes then I need to put even more effort to be outstanding. The biggest lesson I have gotten is never stop learning and never stop improving yourself; I guess this is an occupation hazard being in the digital space where things continuously change, if it not algorithms it’s people’s behaviours and trends. Along the way, I have made and solidified important relationships, and the most remarkable one is with my former boss, Robert Ndung’u. I hold him in high regard as my role model; I envy his understanding of digital media, he is the true definition of a digital media guru and am sure everyone who has worked with him will concur. I have learnt a lot from him, and he has been a great mentor. The Managing Editor at Opera News, Mr Anthony Irari, has also been very instrumental in my career, being supportive of my decisions and providing counsel. Growing up, my father had much influence on me, and I wanted to join the army and become an air force pilot. I found out that it isn’t that easy joining the forces, especially the air force, so I gave up on that dream. It took a while for me to focus on exactly what I wanted after that, and it disoriented me. I think it’s important for young people to be mentored at an early stage so that they can be able to focus their aspirations to more realistic and achievable career choices which I seriously lacked in my early years. My word to the youth is to find something you are good at and work day and night to perfect it. Today’s world having a master’s degree is slowly becoming basic education, so many people have these papers. Don’t get me wrong, papers are important, but they only get you through the door, what makes you stay is talent. You can develop talent if you find something you are good at and improve yourself daily to make sure you are the best in it. My future plan is a daily improvement that will see I become a better version of myself and learn even more about my trade. Digital media is here to stay; we need more data and policies to take full advantage of it professionally, I will hopefully be at the centre of this all, train more people, advice brands and contribute to the growth of this industry. 