Q: For four days in the last three weeks, my colleague has asked me to step in for him during his shift. I am beginning to wonder whether I should report him to our boss. He does not tell me why he has to stay away from work, only that he has to attend to important matters which he will explain later. How do I handle this matter? I am tired of helping him. It is normal for colleagues to request for your help from time to time just as you depend on their assistance to undertake your responsibilities at work. This reciprocity is part of the fabric of teamwork at the workplace. Needless to state, the nature of help sought by colleagues from you varies and some requests, such as the one you refer to, may indeed be impertinent. What is the nature of your relationship with your colleague? Four days in three weeks appears rather frequent. Do you think he might be wrestling with a serious personal matter? Would you impute suspicious reasons to his failure to attend duty, based on what you know about him? The fact that your boss is unaware of the arrangement between the two of you implies that your colleague is reluctant to disclose the reasons for his absence. Have you challenged him to weigh the consequences of his actions? Consider having a candid talk with your colleague and let him know that you are concerned about his frequent requests for you to step in when he is away from work. Ask him whether there is a way you could help him resolve the issue that he has so far kept to himself so that he does not have to take unapproved leave of absence from duty. If stepping in for your colleague presents a risk to your job, state this as a concern and express your unwillingness to continue assisting him in the circumstances. Your colleague might be preying on your kindness, but it could also be that there is a serious issue affecting him. Is there a colleague in whom he could confide or whose advice he might take? Has he spoken to someone in HR? Some individuals unsuccessfully attempt to deal with certain issues in their lives by themselves when external help, such as counselling, may be readily available. If your colleague is unwilling to listen and does not want to divulge information that would enable you or others offer help, it might be useful to let your boss know. Be helpful but do not jeopardise your career by letting your colleague mistake your kindness for naïve charity. Fred Gituku is a Human Resources Practitioner; gitukufred@gmail.com