The African child’s future was stolen by greedy politicians, disease, poor education, malnutrition, war and poor leadership. Worse, the child is denied to access basic literacy in their mother tongue. Late last year, my mother tongue-based learning start-up, M-Lugha, was among those selected to participate in the annual StartupIstanbul exhibition in Turkey. The event brings together the top 100 start-ups out of 160,000 applicants global to pitch in front of investors. Most participants from other countries were really shocked to learn that the African child acquires basic literacy through a second language. They asked: “How can you learn something new using a new language?” Some of them believed it is a violation of the child’s right. Mother Tongue-Based Multilingual Education (MTB-MLE) refers to “first-language-first” education; that is, schooling which begins in the mother tongue and transitions to additional languages. Since the child’s own language enables them to express themselves more easily, then there is no fear of making mistakes. It encourages active participation in learning since the learners understand what is being discussed or asked of them. They can easily use their mother tongue to construct and explain their world, articulate their thoughts and add new concepts to what they know. Language is key to inclusion. If one cannot understand, they won’t learn. Even when children from ethnolinguistic minorities enroll in school, they are often unable to follow classroom instructions and end up being pushed out of the education system. This results in further marginalisation and exclusion from mainstream society. When a child who has never experienced diversity is presented a curriculum in an alien language, that’s definitely torture. According to a recent research study by Unesco, 40 per cent of the global population does not access education in a language that they understand. MTB-MLE programmes not only improve learning; they also broaden outlooks, increase tolerance and foster a respect for cultural diversity. They are also effective in promoting a culture of peace and building equitable and inclusive societies. Mother tongue makes it easier to pick up and learn other languages, develop and critical thinking and literacy skills. Research shows that learning in mother tongue leads to a better understanding of the curriculum. “Mother-tongue-first” or “first-language-first” education affirms the personal worth of the learner, language and cultural heritage. Kenya’s language-in-education policy for early primary education, enacted in 1976, has remained virtually intact. I am glad the new Competency-Based Curriculum (CBC) requires that mother tongue be the language of instruction up to Grade Three. Abdinoor Alimahdi, education technologist, founder of M-Lugha. abdinooralimahdi@gmail.com