Kenya has recorded 152 more positive coronavirus cases in the last 24 hours, bringing the total national tally of confirmed cases to 3,457. All the new cases from 3,503 samples tested are Kenyans, Health Chief Administrative Secretary Rashid Aman announced on Saturday. Of the new cases, 116 are male while 36 are female aged between two and 65 years. So far, the country has tested 112,171 samples. FOUR PEOPLE DIED On a positive note, Dr Aman said that 57 people were discharged from hospital, bringing the total number of those who have recovered from the virus to 1,221. He said that four people succumbed to the virus, taking the national death toll to 100. He said that 38 out of the country's 47 counties have now reported cases of Covid-19. He urged Kenyans to observe containment measures put in place by the government and socialise less to reduce the chances of contracting the virus. “The number of infections and those that have succumbed to the disease point to us the importance of observing the containment measures. This is the surest way of ensuring we limit these numbers and contain the spread of the virus," Dr Aman said. He said the Health ministry will continue to work closely with county governments to upscale the level of preparedness at the county level. He said most devolved units have dedicated isolation and treatment centres for Covid-19. THREE CASES Of the new cases, Nairobi has 70 with 21 from Embakasi South, nine from Starehe, five from Kibra and four from Mathare. Dagoretti North and Embakasi West have three cases each, while Embakasi East, Roysambu, Lang'ata, Kasarani and Westlands each have two cases. In Mombasa, the 41 cases are from Nyali (14), Mvita (10), Likoni (seven), Kisauni (six) and Changamwe (four). Dr Aman said that the 16 cases in Busia are of truck drivers from Malaba. In Kiambu's nine cases, six are Ruiru, while Thika had two and Kikuyu one case. Machakos and Migori counties registered three cases each, while Kisumu, Uasin Gishu, Narok, Nakuru and Taita Taveta had one each. He urged truck drivers to strictly adhere to protocols issued by the Health ministry. "All cross border truck drivers must ensure they get tested at least 48 hours before they commence their journey and acquire a valid Covid-19 free certificate," he said.  