A 14-year-old girl who fled after stoning an 80-year-old woman to death in Seme, Kisumu County has been arrested. The incident happened in Konywera village, East Reru in West Seme Location on Sunday afternoon. The class Seven Pupil is said to have disagreed with the elderly woman on where to tether some cattle. According to Seme Sub-County Police Commander Hellen Chepkorir, the minor tied the cattle at the home of the woman at around 2pm on Sunday afternoon. But the woman asked the girl to move the animals from her compound since she was drying her maize in the sun and feared the animals would interfere with the cereals. QUARREL It is at this moment that a quarrel ensued between the two. The elderly woman had attempted to hit the girl with a walking stick before she retaliated by throwing stones at her. “Police officers visited the scene and established that the juvenile hurled a stone which hit the deceased on the ribs, causing the woman to collapse and fall on the ground,” said Mrs Chepkorir. The woman was rushed to a private hospital where she died. The girl then fled before her relatives pursued her, arrested her and took her to the police. The woman’s body was taken to the Jaramogi Oginga Odinga Teaching and Referral Hospital (JOOTRH) in Kisumu awaiting post-mortem. Mrs Chepkorir said the minor may be arraigned in the course of the week. KAKAMEGA DEATH And in Kakamega County, police in Mumias West are investigating the death of a man whose body was found dumped along the Kakamega-Mumias road on Monday morning. The body of the man, identified as Ali Ongoro, 42, was discovered by motorists near Ekero market who reported to police and his family. His wallet containing some money and a mobile phone were found intact. Ms Catherine Shisia, the man’s wife, said the father of four left their home in Emakhwale village on Sunday at 7pm without saying where he was going. “He left on Sunday evening and we only received a call at 6am that his body had been found lying on the roadside opposite Ekero mosque,” said Ms Shisia. BLOOD STAINS Police who visited the scene noted that the body had some blood strains on the legs with no visible physical injury. Mumias West Sub-County Police Commander Paul Kipkorir said investigations are going on. “We are waiting for the post-mortem result which will give us more leads on the cause of the death but currently we are still recording statements from people he last interacted with,” said Mr Kipkorir. Locals suspect the man was killed elsewhere and his body dumped at the scene by unknown people during the rainy Sunday night. The body was moved to St Mary’s Hospital mortuary in Mumias awaiting post-mortem.