Closure of markets hurts banana growers Banana farmers in Taita-Taveta County are calling for help as they throw away their produce for lack of market. Dinah Lezeni, who farms in Njoro village on two acres, blames their plight on Covid-19. “Currently, I have over 20 bunches of bananas ready for harvest but I don’t know where to sell them,” she says, noting the county government’s move to close markets in Taita-Taveta and Mombasa has affected most farmers in the region. Goodwill Sangale, a grower, asked the county government to find a formula to ensure farmers still earn income even as it fights the pandemic. In the past one year, many farmers have expanded their farms to cash in on an expected rise in demand following construction of a processing plant by the county government in partnership with the European Union (EU) . Agriculture executive Davis Mwangoma said the plant will benefit over 6,000 farmers. Mwangoma said to cushion farmers from losses, they are working to develop alternative markets. "Right now farmers are delivering their produce at Mariakani and wholesale market at Tononoka in Mombasa County. We also have our own wholesale market at the Voi showground," he said. -Lucy Mkanyika ****Kephis gazettes seed inspectors, analysts The Kenya Plant Health Inspectorate Services (Kephis) has gazetted Agri Seed Company (Seed Co) and several individuals to conduct seed inspection and analysis. The authorisation gives the firm powers to complement the work of the inspectorate and enhance efficiency in the seed certification process. “The Seeds and Plant Varieties Act section 3B (1) (b) and (2) (a) provides for authorisation and gazettement of private or public persons by the service to perform specified functions under the Act on its behalf,” said Kephis managing director Esther Kimani in her statement in the Kenya Gazette. The others are William Muthui Munyao of Pioneer Hi-Bred (K) Limited and Ms Pamela Chebet Lagat, Ms Nelly Chepkorir Kiboi, Mr Enock Kiptek Sangut, Ms Lucy Chemjor and Mr Earnest Lelei Kipkoech from Kenya Seed Company. Mr Epher Masibili of Simlaw Seeds and Ms Daisy Jepchumba Kiptoo, Ms Prisca Kapkiyai Saina and Mr James Kipot Chemweno from Kenya Seed Company were gazetted as private seed analysts. The authorisation creates an enabling environment for effective participation of both public and private sectors in the production, inspection and testing of quality planting material. -Brian Okinda