As the effects of coronavirus pandemic continues to disrupt businesses in Kenya, many companies are struggling to cope up with the deadly disease that has killed more than 400,000 people globally. In Kenya, many companies have closed shop and rendered thousands of employees jobless.   One of the major reasons that has seen many processing companies close shop is the high cost of energy with low production from their factories and lack of markets. The cost of running companies and the lack of market due to strict lockdowns has slowed down production of various consumer goods. SOLAR POWER However, two companies in Kenya have a reason to continue with their production after a leading clean solar power provider in the world, German based REDAVIA Company partnered with two local firms to cushion them against the effects of Covid-19. REDAVIA, which is leader of cost-effective, reliable, and clean solar power for businesses, has signed Covid-19 Resilience Leases with the leading Nakuru-based animal feeds manufacturer Wonder Feeds Limited and Siginon Aviation a logistics company, offering these businesses six months of free solar to withstand the Covid-19 crisis. The partnership comes as a big relief for both companies which means their customers would be assured of continued service provision and quality products and the workers will keep their jobs.  “I’m happy with this collaboration with Redavia as it will save us millions of shillings in energy bills. We shall have a steady production as we have a reliable power back up,” said Mr Abdul Parkar the Managing Director of Wonder Feeds. Mr Parkar revealed that the installation will help the company save on power bill, OVERHEAD COSTS “The money saved will help in other overhead costs particularly at this time of covid-19,” said Mr Parkar Before the Covid-19 crisis, Wonder Feeds Limited had upgraded its factory to accommodate its animal feed products business. However, this did not stop their production line from making quality feeds amid Covid-19 crisis. According to Mr Parkar the company management maintained product prices for customers despite the increase of raw material costs, leaving the company with higher operating expenses. The new collaboration with Redavia is a game changer and Mr Parkar says the benefits of the deal will trickle down to their loyal customers.  “Our customers are our kings and we have made these strides in the business because of them and that is why I am so happy and willing to extend the same benefits I am getting from Redavia to our customers by maintaining affordable prices of our feed products,” said Mr Parkar. Siginon Aviation which is a ground handling company based at Jomo Kenyatta International Airport (JKIA) in Nairobi was also happy with the deal. CONSERVATION “As a company one of our key policy is to embrace environmental conservation for posterity during our operations and that is why we operate and engage equipment that limits emissions of carbon fuel into the atmosphere and therefore REDAVIA’s free solar power solution supports our environment policy to the community,” said Mr Edwin Ronoh, Siginon Group Finance Leader. Siginon is one of the few companies in Kenya that advocate for green agenda as one of its key business objective.  “Our partnership with REDAVIA comes at a time when the green agenda is our key business objective. Siginon Aviation continues to embrace business solutions that ensure environmental conservation, and REDAVIA’s solar power solution gives us the opportunity to reaffirm our commitment as a strong believer in environmental conservation,” added Mr Ronoh. Covid-19 has disrupted many African businesses significantly and in this challenging time such gesture by REDAVIA would reduce their operating costs with a flexible free solar plant leasing service. The company has introduced the Covid-19 Resilience Lease, which provides six months free solar power plants to cushion businesses from the effects of the deadly virus.  “We are glad to be able to make a difference for our business partners during this time of need and start a win-win relationships that will last for decades. The Covid-19 Resilience Lease Programme is already a huge success, and we are keen to scale up the programme further. We invite more companies to apply,” said Erwin Spolders, chief executive officer and founder of REDAVIA.