Counties are in a rush to beat the July 7 deadline to have a 300-bed isolation centre ahead of the probable reopening of the economy. As of yesterday, only 10 counties had managed to put up the centres. Governors are expected to meet today in Nairobi to review the progress, which will inform the national emergency response team on the levels of preparedness. The bed shortage is likely to stick out in today’s summit convened by President Uhuru Kenyatta, with the virus having spread to 40 of the 47 counties. Earlier this month, President Kenyatta gave counties Sh5 billion and directed them to set up 300-bed isolation centres in readiness to deal with the surging number of Covid-19 cases in the country. With only two weeks left, will the remaining 37 counties meet the July 7 deadline? POSITIVE CASES Statistics from the Ministry of Health show that Nairobi County is leading in the number of positive cases (2,296), followed by Mombasa (1,274), Busia (342), Kajiado (178), Kiambu (150), Uasin Gishu (61) and Kwale (51). Counties that have recorded less than 50 cases include Kilifi (49), Migori (49), Machakos (40), Nakuru (30), Garissa (25), Taita-Taveta (25), Kisumu (19), Mandera (18), Wajir (17), Meru (15), Turkana (15), Siaya (12), Kitui (11), Nyeri (nine), Isiolo (seven), Bungoma and Muranga (six each), and Homa Bay (five). Kakamega, Kericho, Kisii, Laikipia, Makueni and Narok have all recorded three cases each and Embu has two. Bomet, Elgeyo-Marakwet, Kirinyaga, Marsabit, Nandi, Nyamira, Trans Nzoia and Vihiga have one case each. Mombasa and Nairobi counties have the highest infection rates at 105.4 and 52.2 per 100,000 people, respectively, compared with 10 per 100,000 for the whole country. Even before the country hits its peak, hospitals are fast getting overwhelmed, as those in Nairobi and other counties quickly become full. This is why the government has resorted to home-based care mainly for asymptomatic patients. FINAL STAGES “The work is ongoing, and I’m sure that the remaining counties are going to comply to reach the target ... we are going to meet the President’s deadline,” said Kakamega Governor Wycliffe Oparanya, who is also the chairman of the Council of Governors. He added that most counties are in the final stages of preparations and by the end of this week, most of them will have complied. During yesterday’s Covid-19 briefing, Health Chief Administrative Secretary Mercy Mwangangi said counties were on track, adding that this will not only help in handling Covid-19 cases, but will also improve the health system after the pandemic. “We are going to review the data to know where exactly the counties are, but I’m happy many have made good progress,” she said. PANDEMIC In a projection presented to the national task force on the pandemic, chaired by Health Principal Secretary Susan Mochache, the Health ministry was advised to focus on 15 counties that are likely to be hit hard by the virus. These are Nairobi, Kiambu, Meru, Machakos, Nakuru, Kakamega, Siaya, Murang'a, Homa Bay, Kitui, Makueni, Kisumu, Kilifi, Bungoma and Nyeri, which are likely to consume 57 per cent of the national requirements for management of severe cases. These counties are at risk because they have large numbers of people aged over 60 years, and a high prevalence rate of diabetes, HIV/Aids and hypertension. The model also revealed that when the country hit its peak in February next year, it will need about 356,000 hospital beds and 115,000 ventilators to manage cases.