Machakos Governor Alfred Mutua has welcomed the extension of the curfew period and cessation of movement order in Kenya, saying that the rising Covid-19 cases call for such precautionary measures. Speaking on Monday, Dr Mutua said that all cases in Machakos have emanated from Nairobi and from transporters coming from Mombasa who pass through the county. The governor said that he supports President Uhuru Kenyatta on the measures he has taken to avoid the spread of the virus. “It is quite worrying to see the number of cases are growing. But there is a real danger of an explosion of the disease hence the need for the lockdown,” said Dr Mutua. ICU BEDS He said the Machakos County has continued to put in place measures for dealing with the coronavirus and that there are 15 ICU beds, 10 in county hospitals and five in private facilities. He added that the county has 350 isolation beds and nine ambulances, one in every sub-county, for dealing with Covid-19 emergencies. “We are lucky we have a testing lab and we have ordered for more beds. We have also ordered for 10 ICU beds and equipment that will push our numbers to 25 full equipped ICU beds,” he added. As a precautionary measure, lorries passing through Machakos are only allowed to stop for refuelling so as to keep interaction with locals at a minimum. TRUCK DRIVERS “Truck drivers tested in Mombasa will need to present their Covid-19 negative certification so as to be allowed to proceed into our county,” the governor said. At the same time, the county boss said that tribalism is at the heart of the tensions in the country and that Kenyans need to do away with it. Dr Mutua told politicians in the country to stop engaging in premature campaigns and instead focus on serving the electorate. “What we have is a problem of tribalism and tribalism is an issue that we must continue to deal with and fight with as we continue to develop our country. We cannot achieve our goals if we continue to embark on tribal politics,” he said.