Education Cabinet Secretary George Magoha has hinted at the government considering staggering learning in schools with huge enrolment to avoid overcrowding in classes when the institutions reopen in September. Prof Magoha who spoke at Kakamega Primary School on Sunday said he was confident with preparations being made to check the spread of the coronavirus among learners when a decision is made to reopen schools in two and half month time. He said his ministry was still consulting on the appropriate time to administer this year’s primary and secondary school exams after the time table was disrupted by the closure of schools due to the Covid-19 pandemic. The plan by the government is to provide hand sanitisers and two washable face masks for each pupil to shield them from coronavirus infections, said Prof Magoha. He asked school boards of management and other well-wishers to support efforts by the government to create a safe and conducive environment for learners when they report back to school. “We are having consultations on this issue (reopening of schools) with all stakeholders and in the coming weeks we will have a public participation process before a final decision is made after the Ministry of Health has advised the government on whether it is safe enough for schools to reopen,” said Prof Magoha. The CS said the final decision on reopening schools will be made in consultation with the Ministry of Health and other government agencies involved in fighting the spread of coronavirus in the country. “I’m currently visiting schools to inspect the preparedness in accepting learners when a decision is made to reopen the institutions and I’m very impressed with the progress, including provision of water and an arrangement to avoid overcrowding in classes,” he said. The CS, who made an impromptu visit to the school which in February lost 15 pupils in a tragic stampede, said MPs in several counties had helped procure water tanks for schools to ensure learners were able to wash their hands regularly while in school. He, however, asked Teso North and Teso South leaders to support efforts meant to protect learners from coronavirus infections by providing water tanks in schools for learners to wash their hands as part of the guidelines by the Ministry of Health to contain the spread of coronavirus. “Leaders in Teso North and Teso South, including the MPs should emulate what their counterparts are doing in other regions to ensure our learners are safe while at school. They need to provide water tanks to ensure the institutions have adequate supply of water for learners to wash their hands,” said the Cabinet Secretary. Meanwhile, most Kenyans are opposed to reopening of schools in September, fearing a spike in coronavirus infections among children. An Infotrak survey released yesterday showed that 70 per cent of Kenyans do not support reopening in September. However, most support reopening of churches and places of worship (59 per cent), the research revealed. Majority of those who oppose reopening of schools in September (41 per cent) expressed fear that Covid-19 infection rate will likely go up. “Twenty one per cent of the respondents said the chances of children contracting the virus in school and spreading it is very high,” said Mr Walter Nyabundi, the special projects and loyalty research manager at Infotrak Research and Consulting. Of the respondents, 15 per cent expressed fear that social distancing, which is one of the main measures to curb spread of the coronavirus, in schools may not be possible. Many of the respondents (eight per cent) said that the increasing number of cases is proof that the virus is yet to be controlled in the country while six per cent said the worst of the pandemic may not have hit the country yet, and so, reopening of schools will not be ideal. Another six per cent expressed doubts that schools can keep children safe in their premises. Unlike Coast residents who want schools to be reopened (54 per cent), majority of Nairobi residents (81 per cent) are opposed the plan by the government. During his recent address, President Kenyatta said schools will likely open in September, six months after the government closed them fearing the spread of Covid-19 to children. Nyanza and Rift Valley residents also strongly opposed reopening of schools at 81 per cent and 74 per cent respectively. Nairobi and Mombasa lead in the number of Covid-19 cases in the country and travel restrictions are still in place. Most of those who oppose reopening live in rural areas (71 per cent) compared to 68 per cent in urban areas. The research revealed that a good number of children (42 per cent) do not wear masks when they go out to play together, while 50 per cent do not observe social distancing. Many children (66 per cent) no longer go out to play as they used to before the outbreak.