From tax breaks and visa fees waivers to park entrance discounts and employee support schemes, expectations were high among tourism industry players as Treasury Cabinet Secretary Ukur Yatani read the budget estimates for 2020/21. But little came of their expectations outside the increase of the sector recovery allocation to Sh3 billion from the earlier announced Sh2 billion. The CS also set aside Sh2.5 billion for the Tourism Promotional Fund and a further Sh3.8 billion for the Tourism Fund. “We have set aside this amount to support the renovation of facilities and the restructuring of their business operations across the industry,” Mr Yatani said while presenting his budget statement to Parliament. The sector, which has all but shut down due to the coronavirus pandemic, was expecting concrete recovery plans, mostly on taxation measures and incentives, from Treasury, something they say the statement fell short of. “We expected a tax break and cushioning licences for about six months until we start recovering from the effects of the pandemic,” said Kuldip Touring Company and Indiana Beach Apartments managing director Ishpal Oberoi. Speaking to the Saturday Nation, Mr Oberoi termed the Sh2 billion tourism stimulus package a drop in the ocean. “Levies on fuel should be reduced and other licences should be reduced,” he said. The Covid-19 pandemic has brought tourism and its subsidiary sectors almost to complete ruin, with nearly all hotels completely shut down and thousands of workers sacked, or sent on unpaid or half-pay leave. The Kenya Association of Hotelkeepers and Caterers (KAHC) had wanted the government to increase the Sh2 billion tourism stimulus package to Sh50 billion. KAHC Coast boss Sam Ikwaye said many investors have started selling their establishments. “The nature of the industry is such that there is heavy investment, and so the Sh2 billion is little money compared to the damage caused by the pandemic. It cannot even move the tourism economy. Are we are going to use the money to pay salaries, maintain tourism infrastructure, service debts or pay suppliers?” posed Dr Ikwaye. For hoteliers to unlock the industry, he said, hotel owners need about Sh50 billion to get their establishments running again. “Otherwise, we are killing the sector,” he added. He said CS Yatani should also have considered the wage bill. “His decision must make it possible for the investors to get money to be able to support and maintain the infrastructure and pay the workforce,” Dr Ikwaye said, adding that Zanzibar has already started doing renovations in readiness for the resumption of services. Other tourism players were also looking forward to the government reducing taxes for the industry while at the same time pumping in more money. Kenya Tourism Federation chairperson Mohammed Hersi said Treasury should have offered more incentives to the sector. He said it was also important for the Kenya Tourism Board (KTB) to be properly funded as the sector is expected to undergo an expensive recovery process. “After this pandemic that has affected the industry, KTB will be expected to do more domestic and regional campaigns that need to be funded,” he said. Mr Hersi added that the incentives to be provided by the government should be fast-tracked and be channelled directly to stakeholders to save time. Players also expect that the 2020/21 budget will look into improving the status of infrastructure across the country. For example, Mr Hersi said, Jomo Kenyatta International Airport (JKIA) in Nairobi and Moi International Airport in Mombasa are incomplete and further development should be undertaken. “JKIA remains a summer airport. We want it to be possible for visitors to move from one terminal to the other without walking in open space. Currently we cannot,” he said. Kenya Coast Tourism Association CEO Julius Owino, for his part, said he expected the government to reduce further the taxes in the industry. “It is clear that we have been affected and it will not be right for hotel owners to keep paying for licences and income taxes when there is no business,” he said. He also proposed that the government channel more money to industry players to cushion them and their workers as more than two million jobs have been lost so far, Mr Owino echoed Mr Hersi’s view that KTB should be well funded, noting that for a long time, the board has been grossly underfunded. He said more funds will enable the board to engage in a lot more marketing to attract tourists and convince them that Kenya is a safe destination. Ms Eleonora Cozzi, the owner of Sun Palm Beach Resort in Watamu, said she expects Kenyan charges for visas and parks to be reduced to attract more tourists. “Most tourists usually complain of the expensive visa charges while visiting the country together with high park fees, I hope this will be looked into to promote the industry,” she said. Ms Cozzi also said that in budgeting for the expansion of Malindi International Airport, there is a need to open immigration offices there to enable direct international flights. “Once the airport is expanded and an immigration office becomes functional, Malindi, Watamu and its environs will begin seeing an increase in tourists.” Reporting by Winnie Atieno, Siago Cece and Charles Lwanga.