After decades of neglect, Nyeri County’s second biggest sports facility Karatina Stadium is finally getting a facelift. The Nyeri County Government has completed building a perimeter wall and has also fitted gates at a cost of Sh10.8 million. Work is also in progress at Ruring’u Stadium, the county’s main sporting facility. The national government is elevating Ruring’u Stadium to international standards at a cost of Sh450 million. In the project’s first phase, the county government has already completed erecting a perimeter wall worth Sh20 million. Nyeri County Sports Executive Margaret Macharia said fencing was done first at Karatina Stadium to secure the land and to keep livestock away. The sports department is seeking more funding in the 2020/2021 financial budget for the rehabilitation of the track, leveling of the football pitch, and repairing the dais, among other works. “As a department we will keep pushing for more money to improve stadiums in the region. We hope to have more allocation for the docket in the 2020/21 budget to ensure Karatina Stadium is completed,” Macharia said. At the same time, she said interested corporate bodies and individuals are encouraged to sponsor the construction of key utilities in the stadium such as an ablution block and changing rooms. A spot check by Nation Sport at Karatina Stadium in Mathira Constituency found an enclosed grass field that had several old structures. There was no sign of recent sporting activity in the stadium. The facility has been an open grazing field for livestock and an idling spot for residents. Owing to the poor state of the stadium, athletes have been boycotting competitions held at the venue for fear of getting injuries or even being mugged. The more the stadium remains in poor state, the more talent goes to waste because of lack of proper training ground for athletes. Some sportsmen and women have opted to shift their training to areas like Nyahururu and Iten. Karatina Stadium is strategically and centrally placed in the region since it is surrounded by Kirinyaga, Murang’a and Nyandarua counties. It is a stone’s throw away from the Nyeri-Nairobi highway and is easily accessible by sportspersons from Nyeri and Laikipia counties. One of the athletes who used to train at the facility, six-time Safaricom Lewa Marathon champion Philemon Gitia, told Nation Sport the stadium is one of the best high altitude training grounds. Gitia recalled the good old days in the early 2000s when the stadium was the used for rigorous speed work training by top athletes from Central Kenya. Then, the stadium was under the management of Karatina Municipality. “I have fond memories of the stadium because that is where I trained for and won the Nyeri Half Marathon in 2007. The local government used to maintain the running track well as well as the football pitch,” he said. Nyeri County Athletics Kenya secretary Daniel Gachara said Karatina served as a good alternative venue for build up training ahead of 2007 Mombasa World Cross Country. “Big names among them the 2008 Beijing Olympics Games marathon champion the late Samuel Wanjiru, former Lake Biwa marathon champion Joseph Riri, former middle distance runner Gideon Gathimba, former 10,000m world bronze medallist Irungu Mathathi, among others, used to throng the facility for speed work. The athletes, many of whom were international runners, used to bring a lot of business in the town since they could spend weeks in local hotels,” Gachara narrated. The AK official, who is a retired track athlete and a beneficiary of Karatina Stadium, pointed out that stadiums should not be seen only as grounds of youth doing sports and passing time but also as a source of business creation. “This stadium used to be a major contributor to the county’s economy, especially in the hospitality sector. We used to have as many as six major trials and championships in a year in this stadium, but that is all gone,” Gachara said. More than 100 schools are in areas neighbouring Karatina Stadium. With this high youth population it cannot be overemphasized how important it is to complete the facility.