From the safety of my lockdown office at home in Johannesburg, I’ve just “returned” from the first ever UK virtual visit to Kenya. My visit came at a catalytic time for Kenya. The Covid-19 pandemic has had a dramatic impact on the global economy. While we are still working together to respond to this, we must also turn our attention to how we recover, rebuilding better. We have a clear moment now to choose a greener, more inclusive and sustainable future. Technology isn’t just enabling us to recreate how we used to work, or what we used to work on. I spoke to a number of female entrepreneurs — evidence the ‘Silicon Savannah’ — who are working with the UK-Kenya Tech Hub and are adapting to the extraordinary challenges with unremitting trademark resilience and energy. Even in these most difficult of times, innovation remains strong, as does the breadth and depth of the UK-Kenya relationship. This is framed by the Strategic Partnership that Prime Minister Boris Johnson and President Uhuru Kenyatta signed in London at the UK-Africa Investment Summit in January, where we also announced Sh170 billion of new UK investments in Kenya. BRITISH INVESTORS British investors and employers are doing inspiring things in Kenya. Azuri is providing off-grid solar energy so that children in rural areas can access the government’s TV education. Waitrose has partnered with Farm Africa and donated Sh10.5 million to support Kenyan suppliers and protect workers and their families through healthcare and childcare. Unilever are running a Covid-19 awareness and hygiene campaign in Kenya. I sensed a strong and shared intent about the importance of government and the private sector cooperating to respond effectively to the pandemic and build back better. I heard more about the work between government and industry to ensure cargo continue to flow, including through exports of Kenya’s vegetables and cut flowers to the UK — ensuring British shelves remain stocked — with the support of Kenya Airways and British Airways. UK has also pivoted some of its economic development programmes to help Kenya respond to and recover from Covid-19. UK-funded TradeMark East Africa (TMEA) has adapted its crucial regional work to reduce the cost and time it takes to move across East Africa’s borders. LIFE AFTER COVID-19 I also heard about the Business Situation Room that, through UK support, provides policy advice and real-time support to businesses facing generational challenges, such as manufacturers and SMEs. Although the worst of the pandemic is most likely still ahead of us in Africa, thoughts are naturally turning to what life will be like “after Covid-19”. My visit focused on what we can do to establish and embed the best environment and frameworks possible, so that as we experience economic recovery, we can rebuild more resiliently, more inclusively, cleaner and greener. The UK is providing over Sh1.46 billion support on climate issues in Kenya. It was exciting to talk about the UK companies that are looking to support Kenya’s ambitions on energy access, to strengthen further Kenya’s renewable power production. And it was great to hear that companies like Shell are at the forefront of business efforts to reduce carbon emissions in our economies, including as part of the #RacetoZero campaign. I found so much to celebrate. Even through the digital platforms, I felt the warmth of Kenya’s welcoming embrace. And I look forward to my next visits — virtual and in person. Ms Wade-Smith is United Kingdom’s Trade Commissioner to Africa.