Despite Covid-19 pandemic which has impacted heavily on the FIA World Rally Championship (WRC), the global television viewership mark promises to pass the one billion mark, inching closer to the pre-2004 championship which enjoyed enormous TV coverage. Figures from independent analyst Nielsen Sport also portend a brilliant future for new entrants in the 13/14 rounds series with re-admission of the Safari, New Zealand, and Japan events. Global television audiences for the FIA World Rally Championship soared by 15 percent year-on-year during the opening three rounds of the 2020 season in Monte Carlo, Sweden, and Mexico before Covid-19 either forced cancellation or postponement of events in Portugal, Italy and the Safari Rally. The FIA is looking forward to resuming action in September with the Safari retaining its dates in July next year. Nielsen Sports indicates that more than 242 million people watched Rallye Monte-Carlo, Rally Sweden and Rally Guanajuato Mexico globally on TV, a 16 percent jump from the 211 million in 2019. The three opening rounds attracted an average TV audience of more than 80 million, topped by January’s season-opener in Monte-Carlo which was viewed by more than 100 million people. With Kenyan fans hoping to start subscribing to WRC TV+ and with local channels, including national broadcaster KBC lined up to increase WRC coverage, the 2021 Safari Rally could certainly see these figures jump into unprecedented numbers since the WRC Promoter took over the commercial and media responsibilities of the WRC. The three opening rallies generated 2,679 hours of coverage, a 28 percent rise on last season’s total of 2,095 hours. Both sets of figures maintain the consistent broadcast growth since WRC Promoter acquired the championship’s commercial rights ahead of the 2013 season. Last year, almost 850 million people watched the WRC on global TV, a 38 percent increase since 2013. TV broadcast time was up 66 per cent in the same period. Finland, France, Spain, Belgium and Sweden were the top five audience markets. Japan, which hosted a WRC round in November for the first time since 2010, was also ranked in the top 10. Finnish free-to-air network YLE, which at the start of this year extended its agreement to screen WRC until the end of 2022, topped the list of networks. Sweden’s SVT and Japan’s TV Asahi were also in the top three. Ahead of the 2020 season, the WRC also renewed partnerships with free-to-air broadcaster TVE and tv3 in Spain inked a the new agreement with ITV4 in Britain after a five-year absence and confirmed a contract with Tencent in China. The broadcast figures showed a significant increase in secondary coverage on mainstream news and sports magazine programmes. Nielsen Sport also reported strong digital and social media numbers. There were 112 million online video views across the official channels of the WRC eco-system (WRC, WRC partners, manufacturers and drivers) during the first three months. In the same period the WRC’s own social media community grew to more than 4.3 million fans. Nielsen’s data also showed increased benefits to the car manufacturers competing in the WRC. Ford, Hyundai and Toyota enjoyed a combined media value of more than €150 million (Ksh 18 billion) across the three rounds.WRC Promoter managing director Oliver Ciesla said a raft of changes to teams’ driver line-ups instilled huge anticipation among fans ahead of this season. “The first-quarter TV figures indicate a fabulous start to the 2020 series and highlight the continued increased global interest in WRC. Driver transfers brought further unpredictability and excitement as the pilots settled into their new teams and cars,” Ciesla said in a statement. “Covid-19 has, of course, heavily impacted our season since the opening three rounds. However, WRC TV continues to produce magazine programmes and ‘best of’ shows for our global broadcast partners until the cars can run again,” he added. njengap@gmail.com