The impeachment proceedings in the Senate revealed Governor Anne Waiguru’s two lieutenants who have been by her side in all public controversies. They are Pauline Kamau, the Nyeri-born director of administration, and Chief of Staff Sellah Bogonko. Ms Kamau, and Mr Wayne Gichira emerged as the most powerful individuals when it comes to procurement. They chair crucial valuation committees. Mutira Ward Rep David Kinyua told the Senate that the governor had coerced the County Public Service Board to hire Ms Kamau in her current position even though she did not have the minimum qualifications. She is well-known to the people who make things happen in the county government, an acumen that has earned her the moniker “governor’s most loyal friend”. “She is one of the close confidantes who will stick her neck out for the boss. She is very loyal to the county boss and has Waiguru’s ear most of the time,” a county employee told the Saturday Nation in confidence. In the hearing, Ms Kamau, who is known to be unrepentant about her long alliance to Ms Waiguru, was mentioned by key witnesses giving evidence linking the governor to the alleged misconduct that led to her impeachment two weeks ago. PERSONAL ASSISTANT She was a personal assistant to Governor Waiguru before her elevation. She was handed the post immediately afte the former Devolution Cabinet secretary took over as the county boss in 2017 after gruelling elections. Ms Kamau is now one of the most powerful people in Ms Waiguru’s administration. During the chaotic 2017 Jubilee Party nominations, she accompanied and stood up for Ms Waiguru in the hour of her greatest need. She was among those who spent sleepless nights to ensure the correct count of votes during the repeat nomination at Joseph’s Primary School, Kirinyaga County’s main tallying centre. At Wang’uru Girls Secondary School, Mwea constituency’s tallying centre, she faced off with the returning officer at the time,  Mr Abraham Kariuki, over rigging allegations during the nominations. Ms Waiguru and Ms Kamau were often pictured together in 2015, during the stormy hearings in Parliament over the infamous National Youth Service scandal. MISS FIX-IT Little is known about Ms Bogonko, but she is the governor’s Miss Fix-it and handles crisis communication for her. In October 2015, Ms Waiguru appointed Ms Bogonko to the board of the Youth Enterprise Development Fund. In April the next year, President Uhuru Kenyatta sacked the entire board of the fund over corruption allegations. Ward reps, in their motion, accused the governor of usurping the powers of the accounting officer when she formed a tender evaluation committee led by Ms Kamau and Mr Gichira.