One of the key functions of the Senate is to protect devolution by providing oversight for counties. For that reason, it is involved in approving financial resources for counties and conducts audits on their spending. The function includes checking governance to ensure good management and service delivery. The Senate is the arbiter in administrative and political contests within the counties. Disputes between governors and members of the county assembly are adjudicated by the Senate. That is part of checks and balances that are a cornerstone to democracy. IMPEACHED This week, the Senate will be debating the ouster of Kirinyaga Governor Anne Waiguru, who has been impeached by MCAs over a raft of allegations, including graft and impropriety. This is not the first time the Senate is making such a decision. The latest of the several previous cases was former Kiambu Governor Ferdinand Waititu’s impeachment by MCAs, which it upheld. Waititu had the misfortune that the reasons for his ouster, corruption and pilferage, were already in court. Ms Waiguru’s case comes amid intense politicking and jostling linked to the 2022 succession of President Uhuru Kenyatta. Her party, the ruling Jubilee, is split down the middle with one camp supporting President Kenyatta and the other revolving around his deputy William Ruto. There is political horse-trading all round. The point of discussion here is the principle and process. The Senate has the judicious duty of interrogating the claims against Ms Waiguru and making a just determination of either to uphold or reject them. As the custodian of county interests, it has to be guided by the cardinal principle of protecting the citizens. Counties have become the bastion of theft and pilferage. Resources allocated to develop counties never reach the beneficiaries. PURE EVIDENCE But the Senate has to make decisions based purely on facts and evidence. It has to guard against being used to extend malice or manipulated by extraneous political forces to divert from the path of truth. Extensive lobbying is, definitely, going on across the political aisle as the Waiguru motion comes to the Floor. It would be disastrous if the outcome of the debate is perverted to serve partisan political interests. When the matter comes up for debate, senators should be guided by conscience. However, our fear is that political intrigues and interests have long stilled conscience and principles. Voting in either the Senate or the National Assembly is influenced by extraneous factors, which erode the dignity of the House. For once, senators need to act differently, hence debate and ultimately vote conscientiously.