The political battle between Kirinyaga Governor Anne Waiguru and ward representatives has intensified, with the MCAs reducing the executive's legal fees budget from Sh60 million to Sh1 million. According to the MCAs, the money allocated to pay lawyers who represent the county government in various court cases is too much and it had to be slashed and diverted to the Education department for bursaries targeting needy school children. While passing the Sh5.5 billion budget for the 2020/2021 financial year on Tuesday, the MCAs vowed to ensure that taxpayers’ money is spent well. ZERO FUND FOR NDAMBIRI However, the office of Deputy Governor Peter Ndambiri which had been allocated zero funds got a major boost after the MCAs allocated Sh15.6 million. The political bond between Mr Ndambiri and Governor Waiguru has been visibly strained in the last six months and recent happenings point to a souring relationship between them. "We had to act when we discovered that the office of the deputy governor had not been allocated any funds by the devolved government. This is an important office and it can't operate without finances," said Mr Mathenge. COUNTY SECRETARY Further, the MCAS dealt a heavy blow to the office of the county secretary after slashing almost its entire budget. They reduced the Sh111 million allocation for the office to Sh1 million. They accused the office of being uncooperative. "We have been asking the county secretary to furnish us with documents to be able to carry out our oversight role properly but he has been adamant and therefore we had to give his office minimum funds," said the assembly’s Budget Committee Chairman David Mathenge. NO MONEY FOR COMMUNICATION "The county secretary has been making our work very difficult and the governor has refused to sack him," he went on. And the Sh500,000 allocated for the governor’s communications department was also removed and directed towards ward development. MCAs described the department as a propaganda tool which should not get a single cent. "We even disbanded the department because it was not contributing to any development of the region and it doesn't deserve to be allocated any funds," Mr Mathenge stated.