The Orange Democratic Party (ODM) Sunday threw its weight behind embattled Kirinyaga Governor Anne Waiguru, who faces impeachment. The party’s Director of Elections, Mr Junet Mohammed, said ODM would defend Ms Waiguru, adding that the governor “is being bullied simply because she is a woman”. “There are some people out there who do not believe that women can also lead, but as ODM we believe in leadership by women and we want to give them equal opportunity,” he said, adding, “We have witnessed women leading well in the government and they need to be supported.” The Suna East MP was speaking when he visited flood victims in Bandi, Garsen Constituency, where he was accompanied by area MP Ali Wario, Galole MP Said Hirbae, Isiolo Woman Rep Rehema Jaldesa, and Garsen Central MCA Masha Boru, among other leaders. Mr Mohammed spoke as ODM leader Raila Odinga denied as pure fabrications a report in the Sunday Nation that he met Ms Waiguru at an exclusive Member’s club in Nairobi’s Karen suburb on Thursday evening, and agreed to support her. “No such meeting with Ms Waiguru or the other governors, James Nyoro of Kiambu and Mutahi Kahiga of Nyeri took place as reported in the Sunday Nation. “I also wish to make it clear that there does not exist any Senate committee to investigate Governor Waiguru, and whose members from ODM I have instructed to save the governor as reported in the Sunday Nation,” Mr Odinga said in a statement. The matters around Governor Waiguru, he said, are critical with regard to strengthening devolution and governance in Kenya. But even as Mr Odinga made the remarks, ODM Director of Elections Mr Junet Mohammed said the party will defend the embattled governor from impeachment. The Kirinyaga County assembly last week voted to impeach Ms Waiguru, accusing her of gross violation of the Constitution by failing to deliver the annual State of the County address to the assembly, among other issues. They also accused her of violating Section 46 of the Public Procurement and Disposal of Assets Act 2015 by usurping the powers of the accounting officer in establishing an irregular tender evaluation committee, composed of partisan staff Another charge against the governor was that she used her office to improperly confer a benefit to herself when she was irregularly paid travel allowances by way of imprests amounting to Sh10,634, 614, “yet she did not travel”. The assembly also accused her of violating the right to health of the people of Kirinyaga County. Ms Waiguru now faces the same predicament former Kiambu Governor Ferdinand Waititu found himself in before he was finally kicked out of office in January. This week will be one of the longest for her as the Senate is expected to start the process for her removal from office after Speaker Kenneth Lusaka summoned a special meeting of the House Business Committee. The ouster motion will be filed on the floor on Tuesday when the Senate resumes its weekly sittings. But even as the senators are to decide her fate, the Nation can reveal an elaborate plan to save her from the chop. The governor, unlike Mr Waititu, has been championing the interests of President Uhuru Kenyatta and ODM leader Raila Odinga through their Building Bridges Initiative (BBI), and has remained an ardent defender of the March 9, 2018, handshake between the two. Even though State House has not made any official communication regarding Ms Waiguru’s ouster motion, insiders revealed that already the allegations levelled against her “were being analysed to establish their veracity”. “But I can tell you that is the President’s backyard, and do you know what Waiguru’s impeachment will mean to him after Waititu’s removal early this year? That his backyard forms the epitome of corruption in this country,” the source said, revealing how the former Devolution Cabinet Secretary could just find herself off the chopping block. Senate Majority Chief Whip Irungu Kang’ata said that it was still not clear whether the governor will be impeached. “At this stage I cannot state whether she will be impeached or not. I have not seen evidence from the assembly, neither have I have seen her defence,” Mr Kanga’ta told the Nation. He went on: “However, I take great exception to statements by some Kirinyaga leaders insulting me as a Murang’a person. Those of us from Murang’a take pride that we do our things calmly and with fairness.” “I work to ensure the agenda of His Excellency Uhuru Kenyatta passes in the Senate,” Mr Kang’ata said, adding that he will do this work without fear or favour. He also cautioned the leaders against personalising the current issues. He spoke as three Jubilee MPs allied to President Kenyatta called for Waiguru’s impeachment to be discussed by the entire Senate. The three, Kabinga Wathayu (Mwea), Gichimu Githinji (Gichugu) and Munene Wambugu (Kirinyaga Central), said for Kirinyaga residents to be satisfied, all senators should be involved in the discussion. Led by Senator Charles Kibiru, the MPs opposed plans to have an 11- member special Senate committee handling the They expressed fears that the committee could easily be compromised, and should not be used to debate such a serious matter. Speaking in Sagana town, the MPs said the residents spoke through their elected MCAs, and their voice should be respected by the Senate. “Waiguru’s case should be treated by the Senate like that of former Kiambu Governor Ferdinand Waititu for Kirinyaga people to get justice,” added Mr Kabinga. At the same time, the MPs cautioned Senate Majority Chief Whip Irungu Kang’ata against protecting Ms Waiguru, who was impeached by 23 MCAs out of 33 in a tension-packed House session. Mr Kibiru expressed similar sentiments, adding that the residents were watching to see how the Senate will treat Ms Waiguru’s impeachment. The MCAs voted to kick Ms Waiguru out of office during a motion moved by Mutira Ward Representative Kinyua Wangui. He accused Ms Waiguru of violating   the Constitution and undermining the authority of the assembly and vowed that she must be sent home. However, Ms Waiguru dismissed the accusations as propaganda meant to tarnish her name. The governor also accused the MCAs of bullying her to settle personal political scores but vowed to continue serving the residents who voted for her. Separately, the Kirinyaga Jubilee Chairman Mureithi Kang’ara told the MPs to stop politicising the matter. Meanwhile, Senate Minority Whip Mutula Kilonzo Jnr said that the allegations against Ms Waiguru were yet to be tabled in the Senate. “For now we can only speculate. The evidence will be scrutinised by a committee or plenary session, when a decision is made,” he said.- “The MPs should leave the Senate alone to do its work. The Senate is an independent institution and the MPs should not dictate to it how it should debate on Ms Waiguru’s impeachment,” he said. Kanu, which has entered into a coalition with Jubilee, assured of fairness in the whole process. Reporting by Justus Ochieng’, Charles Lwanga and George Munene.