Jubilee Party Nakuru branch Secretary-General Mtumishi Cheruiyot has defended President Uhuru Kenyatta against attacks by the Judiciary. Mr Cheruiyot said it was unfortunate the attack on President Kenyatta came at a time when the country is struggling to contain the coronavirus pandemic. “The priority for the country is to ensure we have enough medical equipment and personnel to deal with Covid-19 and the attack by Chief Justice David Maraga on the Executive was uncalled for,” said Mr Cheruiyot. WAR ON COVID-19 He added: “People need food now and judges can be employed after we have contained this deadly virus.” At the same time, he said due to the curfew, criminal activities had dropped across the country. “Judges and magistrates will be employed after the war against Covid-19 is won but a hungry population cannot wait,” he added. The Jubilee official urged the Chief Justice to be patient as the staffing issues facing the Judiciary are addressed.  “Attacking the Executive will not solve the problem facing the Judiciary, Chief Justice Maraga should be patient,” added Mr Cheruiyot. Justice Maraga on Monday blamed President Kenyatta for the delay in appointing of 41 new judges proposed by the Judicial Service Commission and continuous disobedience of court decrees on the part of government. EXPRESSED DISAPPOINTMENT The CJ expressed disappointment on having unsuccessfully attempted to bring the issue of the appointment of new judges to the attention of the Head of State. And while announcing the resumption of open court operations countrywide, CJ Maraga said Kenyans should expect a backlog of cases and congested court diaries owing to the few number of judges currently serving in various courts. He also named two court rulings which challenged the delay in the appointment of the 41 judges as having directed the President to do so but he has declined to heed to those orders. He pointed a finger at the Attorney-General for having filed a notice of appeal intending to challenge decisions rendered by the High Court in the two cases but has not yet managed to set aside the said decrees. He called on the President to appoint the 41 judges who were already recommended by the JSC as well as ordered by the court in the two cases.