The National Council for Persons with Disabilities (NCPD) has raised its concern over the reports that people, mostly children, are increasingly being abandoned on the streets. This is mainly because the families can no longer provide for them as the Covid-19 pandemic has depleted their sources of income. This vulnerable group already faces challenges including vision impairment, hearing impairment, mental health conditions, acquired brain injury, autism spectrum disorder, physical disability, old age and chronic illnesses that make illnesses more dangerous to them. It pains to hear younger people, particularly while reassuring one another, say Covid-19 “isn’t that bad because it mainly kills the elderly (over 60) and chronically ill people”. Disability is not by choice but by nature. FEAR-BASED IMPULSE The connection between people with pre-existing medical and disability conditions could become blurred and those affected stigmatised. Everybody should guard against fear-based impulse to confine or even ostracise people who have, for example, chronic coughs or breathing difficulties that are usual for them, and are not by themselves evidence for exposure to the coronavirus. The advice by the Ministry of Health and the World Health Organization (WHO) on the measures to control the spread spread of the virus is logical and should be followed. But many people with disabilities cannot take the precaution, especially on their own. Some cannot isolate themselves like other people because they need regular, hands-on help to perform everyday self-care tasks. Even cleaning their homes and washing hands frequently is extra difficult. This makes observing social distance impossible for them. People with chronic health conditions even worry that they won’t get their supply of prescribed medication. Depending on the medication and what health insurance one has (which only a few can afford), just getting timely regular refills can be a challenge even without a public health crisis. Besides, most of them no longer go to hospital for regular check-up for fear of contracting the virus. GREATER RISK To people with disabilities, the greater risk of Covid-19 might not actually be from the disease but the disruptions in services and routine that it can cause. The government should consult them about their emergency planning — including where and how to get essential supplies. The ministry must include all the needs of people with disabilities in its anti-Covid-19 effort and ensure they have access to health facilities and receive equal treatment to others. Every such person should also fully access all communications about Covod-19. For instance, the ministry can create visual or sign language advertisements about the virus to ensure inclusivity of the hearing-impaired. In addition, any testing and medical facilities must be fully accessible to them. Lastly, the government should ensure that every person with disability is included in its cash transfer programmes, which have more than 1,000 beneficiaries. David Ronald, Siaya