Manchester City and England forward Raheem Sterling blames racism for the acute shortage of black coaches in his country’s football hierarchy. The Independent newspaper reports that Raheem, who has lent his support to the raging “Black Lives Matter” campaign, believes that an even playing field would have seen many more blacks holding coaching positions. On the contrary, their white counterparts seem to thrive, Raheem says in the report culled from a BBC interview. “There’s Steven Gerrard, your Frank Lampards, you have your Sol Campbells and you have your Ashley Coles. All had great careers, all played for England. At the same time, they’ve all respectfully done their coaching badges to coach at the highest level and the two that haven’t been given the right opportunities are the two black former players. I feel like that’s what’s lacking here, it’s not just taking the knee, it is about giving people the chance they deserve,” he said. According to the newspaper, Gerrard landed himself a coaching role at Liverpool before taking the Rangers job in Scotland as his first major role, while Lampard has made swift progress from becoming Derby County manager to taking the Chelsea role that he currently occupies. SYMBOL OF RESISTANCE In contrast, Campbell became assistant manager of Trinidad and Tobago at the start of 2017, but did not land himself a management role until late 2018 when he took the Macclesfield Town position, before moving on to Southend United in October 2019 — both jobs that came with significant financial constraints — while Cole is yet to find himself a job back in football despite earning his coaching badges with a reputation behind him as one of England’s greatest ever defenders. Sterling offers a prescription of what needs to be done to address the situation. He  feels that changes need to be made outside of football in order to filter down through the sport.  ‘Taking the knee’ is the symbol of resistance by “Black Lives Matter” activists where they kneel on one knee. It imitates the brutal manner in which Minneapolis policeman Derek Chauvin who murdered Black American George Floyd by kneeling on his neck as the victim cried for help shouting “I can’t breath”, sparking violent protests never before seen in America’s history. The protests that began in the United States have now become global. Last week, protesters in Bristol, United Kingdom dumped into the sea the statue of Edward Colson, a 17th century slave trader.  Reports had it that the Scouting Movement founder, Baden-Powell’s statue was also among the statues added to a growing “hit list” of nearly 80 across the United Kingdom.