A father is the first man in the daughter's life. In the initial years of her life, she tends to develop a stereotyped image of males based on how her father treats her. A father plays a great role in determining how his daughter will look at other men in society. The feeling of warmth and security makes most girls feel important and wanted. THE STORYTELLER DAD Leanne Peris, 30, serial entrepreneur;  father - John Kimani Wathanga, 62 a Mechanical engineer, retired educator, business owner of VIP Transport and pastor I am the middle born of three children, the child that everyone but my father can easily forget! One of the virtues I have come to admire about dad is his devotion to integrity and justice.  It has sometimes gotten him into trouble because not everyone likes people like him. He has always validated all my dreams, including the silly ones. He would never tell me that something was impossible. When I was young, I wanted to become a princess like Diana. I thought I would marry a prince. He never said it couldn't happen, much to the frustration of my elder sister who never hesitated to tell me that Kenya was not a monarchy. Growing up, we also kept asking him to buy us penguins to store in the fridge as we saw on DW documentaries in the Artic. He would always say he'd do so someday. I can't recall a time when he was absent from our lives. He strove to be home by 6pm so that we could spend the evenings together, telling stories and singing. We spent a lot of time on the road touring and finding new adventures. During these drives (which continue to date), we'd talk about everything. My dad is a storyteller. There is never a dull moment with him. He also has a predilection for pranking my mom, which always ends up in laughter. For a long time, we discussed how he would one day build a limousine by stretching a regular car. Being an engineer, he kept saying it would be possible. One morning after this back and forth, he sent me a picture of one of our family cars cut in half. I almost fell off my seat. He was 55 then. Four months later, he had a working limousine that shocked the whole country. The headlines read: 'Man from Kiambu builds a Limousine'. The limo has been part of so many weddings and VIP transfers since then. His involvement in our lives, his grasp of our businesses, projects, and challenges by heart is the most amazing thing that I'll always cherish. When I started my Diner en Blanc business six years ago, he bought a white tuxedo and dragged my entire family to the launching event. He raised us to have opinions about everything. In our household, everything is up for discussion and analysis. He never made us feel like we couldn't express ourselves. It is because of this that despite being an introvert, I am very outspoken and honest, and never shy to say what I think. My dad is big on reasoning things out and this is how we communicate, not just with one another but even with other people. So in our house, 'Why?' is a very common question, and one must be ready with a satisfactory answer. Listening was a big part of our upbringing. When a conflict arose, everyone would be allowed to say their part, and even if the other person was lying or saying things you didn't like, you had to listen without interrupting. To date, I am a great listener and get visibly upset when someone interrupts me. Every time I feel like I want to give up, I remember my dad and what he has taught me. He is my hero, and I am the daughter of the greatest dad in the world. THE FIRM BELIEVER FATHER Mercy Pendo, 28, Customer care executive and photographer is daughter of Joseph Mwadory, 65,  a businessman I am the second born in a family of four. Throughout my life, my dad has always been present. Last year was the first time that we celebrated New Year apart. He calls me daily to find out how I am doing. Most people around me think it is old school, but it has become a constant reminder that I have a father who cares and wishes the very best for me. He's the first person I'll call if I'm in trouble. I'm not ashamed to call him and cry when I'm frustrated. Although he never got the opportunity to further his studies, he always emphasised the value of education. I was an average student while my brother was an A student, but my dad never made me feel academically inferior. He reminded me that every child is special. I didn't pass very well in high school, but he reminded me that I can be whoever I want to be if I set my eyes on it. I promised myself to be the best. I went to Kenya Institute of Mass Communication and pursued a certificate in broadcast journalism. He started buying daily newspapers and subscribed to international news channels to help me sharpen my skills. Every semester, he'd remind me that I was going to school for me and him. This fired up my engines. In 2015, I graduated with a diploma and enrolled for a degree at St. Paul's University. I graduated last year with two majors (Public Relations & Development Communication). I am who I am today because of his sacrifices, love and support. I want him to know that I love him, and appreciate what he's sacrificed for our family. THE PICK-ME UP DAD Jane Mghambi Otieno, 30, leadership facilitator, life couch and public servant is the daughter of Rev. Fredrick Otieno Opondo, 56 a farmer and pastor I fell pregnant aged 16 while still in secondary school. In the society's eye, this was shameful: 'the reverend's daughter getting pregnant while still in school.' But my father loved me enough. He took me in as his daughter and told me that it was not the end of the road. I could still realize my dreams. He took me back to school after I delivered my daughter. He took care of my daughter while I studied to university level. He never complained or said how things could have been different. I am the second born in a family of four. I have two sisters and one brother. My dad sold our three-bedroom house to ensure that we got the best education possible. The house was his most beloved and valuable asset. He let it go to see us through university. His integrity and love for the truth is the virtue I most admire about him. He taught us to do the right thing and always tell the truth no matter what. He nurtured us to be leaders. He valued family deeply and gave us all the attention we needed as children. I owe him my life. He is the best father there could ever be. THE ENCOURAGING DAD Ivy Njeri, 26, Marketing Lead, Yusudi social enterprise is daughter to Kamau Mwihia, 55 an electrical engineer and businessman who runs a cottage restaurant in Nakuru called Elementaita Bandas My dad is one of the kindest people I know. I've seen him feeding families, putting strangers through school, and supporting the less fortunate in our community. If you ask my siblings, they will tell you I'm a daddy's girl. I am the second born of five kids. I used to be the one they would send to ask my dad for favours. I have taken after him in certain aspects of my personality. Just as he's known to do, at five years, I would boldly look him in the eye and state my case. None of my siblings ever dared do that. One of my most treasured moments was on the morning of my wedding. He walked into my room and told me that I would always be his beautiful baby girl. I had grown up knowing that he was a tough man, but seeing him close to the brink of tears and hearing him say such deep words moved me. It is a moment that I'll never forget. There was also a time when I was having a really tough time at work. I would call him and he would listen to my rants and frustrations, and then ask me questions about my projects. We would speak for hours trying to come up with a solution. He said something to me during that season that has kept me sane over the years; 'Just because something is not working, doesn't mean you're doing it wrong.' His words gave me validation. As an adult, I've gotten to know him on a very different perspective. We've sat down and had conversations about marriage, life, money that will guide me in my journey through life. Oh, and my dad is hilarious too! He's the guy we would circle around during family gatherings. THE SELFLESS GIVER DAD Daisy Osodo, 27, owner Daisy Cosmetics is daughter of Vitalis Osodo, 5,1 a HR practitioner at East African Growers Limited There is nothing that can match the love that my father has for family. Recently, he adopted my male cousin who is an orphan. I grew up with the sense that he was always there in my life. As kids, he'd let my sisters and I do his hair. I am the first born of three sisters. We'd put colorful hair bands and pins on his hair, and paint his nails during playtime. This meant a lot as it taught me how a real father and a good man interacts with his kids. Being open gave me comfort that there was nothing under the sun I couldn't confide in him. This assurance stands up to date. During the 2007 post-election violence, he lost his job and business. It crashed him and he struggled to continue maintaining the lifestyle we were used to. But through it all, we never lacked. He made sure that all our basic needs were met. At some point in our childhood, he worked in several foreign countries. We would see him only three times a year. But despite being overseas, he made sure that he traveled home during our visiting days, and annual academic events. This made us feel his presence. Up until today, he still does his best to give us the best, even though we are now adults. He is a selfless and wonderful father.