The Kenya Music Festival is mourning the death of veteran popular Twist singer John Nzenze. The festival, the biggest co-curricular activity in the Ministry of Education popularised Mzee Nzenze’s music by including it as a competitive class at the event. Festival Executive Secretary Ruth Agesa, who is also the head of performing arts at the Ministry of Education sent condolences to the musician’s family and his fans. "It is with profound sadness that the Kenya Music Festival fraternity has learned of the demise of Mzee John Nzenze, the last of the three most popular Twist musicians – Daudi Kabaka, John Mwale and John Nzenze – all from Shamakhokho Location in Vihiga County. On behalf of all choral musicians, the Kenya Music Festival fraternity would like to send a message of condolence to his family, all musicians and the nation at large," said. MUSIC GENIUS Speaking to the Daily Nation, Dr Agesa said that Mzee Nzenze touched many souls through his genius in the Twist genre of which is performed by students during the annual festivals. Nzenze’s music became popular in the early 1960’s (in pop scenes), long before many of the current choral musicians existed. However, the introduction of the adaptation and arrangement of popular music for performance in choral scenes in the late 1990’s at the Kenya Music Festival provided a unique opportunity for his music to find new meaning. ADAPTATIONS Over the years, choral composers (teachers and trainers) have adapted and re-arranged his music which has distinctively stood out not only for its entertainment value, but also educational worth. Among his most celebrated songs at the Kenya Music Festival are “Angelike”, “Veronica”, “Ninamliya Susana”, “Marashi ya River Road, Twisti ni Nzuri and the only Twist song in Dholuo – “Helena Atieno”. Dr Agesa said his accepting to have his compositions performed as choral music enhanced the remembrance of this genre as well as its new membership among young people. “From an African perspective, when a wise man dies, his tongue lives on. John Nzenze has exited the stage, but his music lives on. Mzee, the choral musicians of Kenya celebrate you, will fondly remember you for the entertaining and educative music that you brought to this nation,” she said. "The memories of your music, presence on stage, humble personality and smile will always warm our hearts," Dr Agesa added.