Regional directors at the Teachers Service Commission will now have power to deploy primary and secondary schools heads, their deputies, senior teachers and other administrators. However, recruitment and promotion of administrators in extra-county and national schools will be conducted by TSC from its headquarters. In circular to directors of education, TSC boss Nancy Macharia announced that the commission has developed guidelines to enable the officers to effectively perform the function. PROMOTE EFFICIENCY “The guidelines should be read together with the Commission’s policy on appointment and deployment of institutional administrators, career progression guidelines, the code of regulation and other regulations governing the teaching service,” said Ms Macharia in the circular. She added that the aim of the change was to promote efficiency in the appointment and deployment of administrators to public schools. In the new regulations, county directors will identify the available administrative vacancies. These will then be advertised by the head office, which will also short list candidates and send the lists to respective counties. The regional directors will be expected to conduct interviews for selected candidates in collaboration with the respective county directors. The regional directors will then appoint and deploy successful candidates. According to the guidelines, a single-stream school (primary or secondary) will be required to have one head teacher or principal, a deputy and senior teachers. A primary school with 10 streams and a maximum of 4,000 pupils will have one head teacher, two deputies and eight senior teachers. A secondary school with 12 streams and a maximum of 2,100 students will have one principal, two deputies and nine senior teachers. A teacher in primary school will be required to have a maximum of 35 lessons while one in secondary school will be required to handle 27 lessons per week. Meanwhile, teachers in private schools have protested against failure by their employers to pay them salaries since March following the closure of schools due to the Covid-19 pandemic. SUFFERING Kenya National Union of Private Schools Teachers (KNUPST) Secretary-General Dan Khasiani said teachers in most private schools are suffering since the institutions stopped remitting salaries. “By the time schools open (in September), these teachers shall have gone for six months without a salary,” he added. He regretted that a majority of private schools had turned their backs on their own teachers despite them producing top students in the country. Mr Khasiani asked the government to urgently provide a stimulus package for the teachers. Already private schools have appealed to the government to provide them with grants in order to sustain the wage bill of their teaching and non-teaching staff. The owners of the schools are seeking about Sh7 billion for this purpose.