Western region is endowed with rich talent in athletics that needs to be tapped and nurtured, a regional official has said. Nyanza North region Athletics Kenya (AK) chairman Joseph Ochieng Tuesday said the region can produce great sprinters and field event athletes if supported with technical expertise and facilities. Ochieng spoke at Kisumu National Polytechnic where runners preparing for the World Under-20 Athletics Championships from the Nyanza North camp received food donations and cash stipends from Athletics Kenya. A total of Sh7 million was set aside for 19 World U-20 camps in April but the training did not take off owing to the Covid-19 pandemic. The world junior championships which had been planned for July 7-12 but was postponed due to scourge. Athletics Kenya Director for Youth and Development, Barnaba Korir, delivered the stimulus package. Ochieng said they had requested for the secondment of sprints coach David Maritim to train the athletes in the camp. Lockdown rest "We hope Athletics Kenya will still consider the request. Athletes have been facing challenges because of the Covid-19 lockdown," Ochieng said. The coach said they expect that Siaya Stadium will be completed by December and together with Bondo Stadium, the facilities will come in handy for athletes. Ochieng is confident that his athletes will dominate the sprints and field events during World-U20 trials. Among the athletes from Nyanza North camp eyeing places in the team are Paradise Akoth (100 metres/200m), Maurice Ochieng (100m/200m), Joshua Mambo(100m/200m) and race walker Purity Akoth. Korir appealed to the county governments in Western region to help develop sports facilities. "We are ready to provide expertise especially in sprints and field events, but we really need the county governments especially in Kisumu to develop facilities," Korir said. He said that Moi Stadium in Kisumu is one of the venues that require refurbishment. Korir, who is also the Athletics Kenya Nairobi branch chairman, said the Western region is capable of producing great short distance athletes if helped.