A couple in Mathira, Nyeri County that had decided to give away their children due to poverty can now breathe a sigh of relief after Kenyans of goodwill rallied to alleviate their economic situation. The couple that has been married for five years was putting their two children up for adoption saying they could no longer sustain them owing to harsh economic times. Samuel Ndungu and his wife Mary Nyambura Mwihaki have now put a halt on their painful decision after Kenyans came out to support them with food, finances as well as job offers. “I honestly have no right words to thank those that came out to support us. We have been getting visitors and hundreds of phone calls from people willing to help. Now our children can stay with us because we have enough to feed them,” Mr Ndung’u said. After their story was highlighted by NTV and the Nation, police officers from Karatina Police Station were the first to answer their distress call with food.  Politicians, neighbours and corporates soon followed as more Kenyans continue to walk into the couple’s temporary home with aid. “We received a mattress, a lot of food and even clothes. I was offered a job at a local supermarket and my wife has also been getting job offers,” Mr Ndung’u said. A tiny single roomed house not bigger than ten square feet has been home for this family of four.  They all share a tiny bed and use a dilapidated structure a few metres from the house as their kitchen. The house was given to them by their current employer.  The youngest is only 10-months-old and the oldest five. The oldest child is living with Ms Nyambura’s parents. The family has been surviving on menial jobs just to make ends meet.  According to Mr Ndung’u, this is the only home they know as he cannot trace his family. Both of them take casual jobs to get food and temporary shelter from a willing employer. “I have no place to call home so I depend on the next employer to give us shelter until we find another job elsewhere,” he said. He currently works as a farmhand picking tea from vast plantations, but the wages he receives can barely feed a family of four for even a day and at times a meal.  For every kilo of tea he picks, he earns a paltry Sh12. On a good day he can pick up to 20 kilos to earn him Sh240 and on bad days, the pay can be less than Sh100.  In the last paycheck seen by the Nation, Mr Ndung’u was paid a mere Sh72 for six kilos of tea leaves picked. “When you are making that little money putting food on the table is impossible. For us to decide to give away our children it is because we did not want to see them starve. When life gets to such a point you just wish you would be dead,” he narrated. Now, corporates have stepped in to support the family financially and get them stable jobs to help improve their lives. 