Raila Odinga’s ODM will be among other friendly political parties that will line up to reap the spoils of the fallout in Jubilee after the party’s Parliamentary Group meeting at the Kenyatta International Convention Centre (KICC) chaired by President Kenyatta this morning. Other beneficiaries of the slots left vacant in House committees following the purge on Deputy President William Ruto’s allies are Chama Cha Mashinani, whose leader is former Bomet Governor Isaac Ruto, and Kalonzo Musyoka’s Wiper Democratic Party. While both parties signed a post-election cooperation agreement with the ruling party last Wednesday, ODM is yet to take that route, and its relationship with the Jubilee remains anchored on the March 9 handshake between Mr Odinga and President Kenyatta. Kanu has already signed a post-election coalition pact with the President’s party. National Assembly Minority Whip Junet Mohamed confirmed that ODM would participate in the sharing of the slots after the Jubilee PG. While the PG has been summoned specifically to deal with the issue of whether Aden Duale should be retained as Majority Leader, there are reports that other political parties could be allowed in once this matter is dispensed with, to engage on how the House committees will be reconstituted. A majority of the committees in both chambers have no leadership after the ruling party de-whipped all those perceived to be loyal to the DP, a sign that Mr Odinga is keen to benefit from the spoils of the sacking of Kenya’s Number Two. “We also want our members to chair some of the House committees,” said Mr Mohamed, who is a close confidant of Mr Odinga. Apart from heading some of the senior positions in the Minority side, ODM is said to be angling to lead the committees of Justice and Legal Affairs and that of Delegated Legislations, as part of efforts to consummate the handshake deal. Rarieda MP Otiende Amollo has, in the recent past, been linked to lead the Justice committee after the previous holder, Baringo North’s William Cheptumo, was de-whipped. It is not clear who ODM is fronting for the chair of the Committee on Delegated Legislations, which was previously held by Uasin Gishu MP Gladys Shollei. The Ruto lieutenants, in their usual reactionary nature, accused President Kenyatta of dictatorship in the running of party affairs, and declared they will not attend. Soy MP Caleb Kositany, who is Mr Ruto’s de facto spokesperson, claimed that meetings chaired by the President no longer have meaningful agenda, but to purge the DP’s perceived associates. “Nowadays, what the party does is to remove people and replace them with non-performers and Monday’s meeting is not an exception. Most likely Majority Leader Aden Duale might be shown the door,” he said. The lawmaker disclosed that he is aware of plans to remove him as deputy secretary-general, but added that he cannot be intimidated and will continue with the court battle until the changes effected in the Jubilee Party are done in accordance with the law. “Plans to remove me must be there because I’ve been against boardroom takeovers. They want to stifle democracy, but I’m waiting to be called by the disciplinary committee. We believe that justice will be served and all those illegalities will be rewritten,” Mr Kositany said. MPs Nelson Koech (Belgut) and Daniel Rono (Keiyo South) said they will not lobby for any committee position, arguing that doing so will be a betrayal to their colleagues who were ejected unceremoniously. “I’m personally struggling to reconcile my conscience on how I will attend a forum meant to crucify our generals. We’re not interested in serving in any committee,” Mr Koech said. Mr Rono said what is going on now is the President running the party unilaterally. He argued that Mr Duale is likely to be sacrificed because he is close to the DP. Kieni MP Kanini Kega is poised to replace Kikuyu lawmaker Kimani Ichung’wah as chairperson of the Budget and Appropriations Committee, a powerful entity that bears great influence in national budget-making and how public finances are used. Kamukunji MP Yusuf Hassan Abdi is being floated to replace Mr Cheptumo in the Justice and Legal Affairs committee. “I’m optimistic that Kega and Abdi will take over as the chairmen of both the Budget and Legal committees, respectively,” said Gatanga MP Joseph Nduati. Kesses MP Swarup Mishra, while speaking in his constituency on Sunday, disclosed that Mr Duale may have to go because the party was no longer at peace with him. “I’m among those who appended their signatures to remove Mr Duale and Monday’s meeting will relieve him of his duties,” Dr Mishra said. Cherangany MP Joshua Kutuny said the President is committed in ensuring that constitution change takes place after the country comes out of the Covid-19 pandemic, and Mr Duale had lost the Head of State’s trust given that he sits in the House Business Committee. Interests of the paty “The meeting will ensure Duale is gone... We want someone who will serve the interests of the party.  He sits in the Business Committee, which determines the agenda of the House and with the referendum coming up, we must have someone who will not oppose it,” Mr Kutuny said. According to Mr Kutuny, the move by the Deputy President’s allies to come up with a command centre with the name Jubilee Asili, is one of  the things which continues to escalate tension in the party, terming it as ‘disrespect’ to the party leader. “They’re going against the rules and undermining the President,” Mr Kutuny added. Reported by Ibrahim Oruko and Onyango KÓnyango