The Kisumu County government has called for strict adherence to the new rules on handling bodies after the county recorded its seventh imported coronavirus case. Bodies will be picked from mortuaries no later than 9.30am and burials should be within six hours. Governor Anyang Nyong’o said a body should be buries or cremated within 48 hours of death. The county boss added that no mortuary would receive bodies from deaths that occur outside their facilities unless it is a police case. “Mortuaries that deviate from this directive shall have their licences withdrawn and offending officers prosecuted,” Governor Nyong’o said. Kisumu reported the seventh Covid-19 case and one death on Monday. Two were truck drivers from Busia, four had travelled to Kisumu from Nairobi for funerals while the deceased had been referred to Kisumu from Migori County. The dead was a 57-year old man who had shown Covid-19 symptoms. “Four of the cases are at the Jaramogi Oginga Odinga Teaching and Referral Hospital isolation centre while the other two are in Nairobi,” the governor said while giving a Covid-19 update of Kisumu. “We have carried out 526 tests. Some 73 per cent are males and the rest females.” He added that about 66 contacts linked to the positive cases have been quarantined. Bodies being transported from outside or through the county should have a record on cause of death certified by a government pathologist. “The bodies should be accompanied by not more than five people,” he said. “The death certificate should be sent to the county public health director before departure from point of origin.” DN Briefs text: Prof Nyong’o said those accompanying such bodies must have Covid-19 negative certificates issued at the point of origin and written authority for the journey. The bodies and those accompanying them will be screened at the county points of entry. “Bodies passing through Kisumu County shall be escorted by teams of security and public health officers from the point of entry to the border of exit. There will be no stopover in Kisumu,” the governor said. He said Kisumu has acquired four ICU-enabled ambulances to improve surveillance and support contact tracing.