The impact of Covid-19 is triggering a revolution in Kenya’s education system as higher-learning institutions scramble to establish robust digital infrastructure to allows students to continue with lessons. Even as a number of universities work on their existing online platforms to set up short-term virtual teaching and learning solutions, the country is on track to embracing a new educational model after the pandemic. However, universities are faced with the arduous task of ensuring that all programmes offered through e-learning conform to learning outcomes and other requirements specified in the face-to-face delivery of the curriculum. 6,000 STUDENTS As a way of enabling students to get the best user-friendly platform, Mount Kenya University (MKU) has pumped Sh50 million into improving its infrastructure. The vice-chancellor, Prof Stanley Waudo, said the initiative has enabled students to get value out of online learning and enabled the institution to handle an influx of new entrants who want to complete their coursework on time. “What we are doing is testing students on critical thinking and understanding of the subject in order to curb the possibility of cheating,” he said. To ensure students who were due to graduate in August don’t miss out, MKU has urged those who had not completed their coursework or written their examinations to register for online classes. By Friday evening, 6,000 students, especially those in their final year, had registered for the classes. Before the pandemic, the university had 7,000 students on their e-learning platform. “Being that we were already one of the biggest e-learning providers in the country even before Covid-19, transitioning to this new normal has not been challenging,” Prof Waudo noted. CORONAVIRUS CRISIS Jaramogi Oginga Odinga University of Science and Technology has also been forced to scale up its online learning model, which was in the pilot phase before the first positive case of Covid-19 was confirmed in Kenya. In the past three months, Vice-Chancellor Stephen Agong said, the university has brought about 10,000 students onto their e-learning platform. “Despite its horrific implications for global health and the economy, the crisis of coronavirus is a blessing in disguise for many learning institutions since it has brought a welcome rebirth of our education systems,” he told the Nation. The hospital has rolled out an e-learning platform alongside other online communication platforms such as Zoom and the Kenya Education Network (Kenet) conferencing facility, he said. “Due to the disadvantages people with special needs face, we are achieving 75 per cent success as they require specific support and teaching tools that may not always be available in distance learning.” Considering that blind people cannot get reading materials through videoconferencing, Prof Agong said that the use of phone calls is one of way being used to deliver the curriculum. SPECIALISED SOFTWARE “For those who may not have access to online support, we will make arrangements to ensure that no one is left behind,” he added. The university, he said, is considering purchasing specialised software for online exams. Maseno University has decided to strengthen its eCampus, which previously existed as an independent campus. “The Covid-19 pandemic has presented us with the challenge to expand our virtual campus and extend our services to over 20,000 campus-based students,” said Communications Director Owen Mc’Onyango. Before the pandemic, he said, eCampus had about 2,000 students. “Even for the face-to-face students, we had some common courses that were offered through e-learning,” he added. Pointing out that the university will continue having face-to-face learning, Dr Mc’Onyango said students will have the liberty to attend classes on the virtual platform after the Covid-19 pandemic. “Those who may not be present during on-campus learning for one reason or the other can attend remotely from wherever they are. All we need to do is expand it, sharpen it and improve it,” he said. “This is to ensure that lecturers maintain the same depth of engagement with students like they would have in a classroom setting.” ONLINE TESTS From an initial 5,000 online users, Masinde Muliro University of Science and Technology Open Distance and e-Learning director Gordon Nguka said the service has been extended to over 23,000 learners and lecturers. “From March this year, we have been conducting virtual thesis defence for our master’s and doctorate students,” he said, adding that they are doing two defences per week. Undergraduate students are also learning and doing tests online. He revealed that the university is working on the logistics of doing exams online. As a way of ensuring equity and enabling access for students, he pointed out that the university is working with Safaricom and Telkom to provide free internet services to students and academic staff.