Finally, better news is beginning to emerge relating to provision of essential services to women and girls — survivors of the lethal ‘shadow pandemic’ that is sexual and gender-based violence (SGBV) — the challenge that is among the worst disruptions that have been instigated by the dreaded Covid-19 pandemic. They have been the main victims of especially sexual and domestic violence, where, sadly, close family members and other relatives the main perpetrators. Since Kenya confirmed the first Covid-19 case on March 13 and started implementing containment measures, including the ‘stay at home’ directive, sexual and domestic violence struck and, painfully, also targeting girls who have been home since, following the closure of learning institutions. TEENAGE PREGNANCIES Cases of teenage pregnancy have been increasing in many counties, led by Nairobi. Each new day brings with it news of a sexually abused girl and woman, in addition to the same from domestic violence. The media have not even started to report a quarter of the extent of SGBV. What is reported is just a tip of the iceberg. Teen pregnancies, including from incestuous abusive situations, tramautised and desperate girls staring at an uncertain future thanks to this brutality even by people who should be their protectors, is part of a chunk of news that the affected minors greeted this year’s Day of the African Child that was observed Tuesday. From Busia County, for instance, should you want to confirm this claim, have a chat with Ms Mary Makokha, the firm and fearless women’s and child rights advocate, the founder of Rural Education and Economic Enhancement Programme (REEP). Members of the civil society have, since mid-March, been speaking themselves hoarse, calling for specific actions to stop SGBV on its tracks. They have also kept asking that it be included in the Covid-19 response. That would also include constant messaging by the national and county governments, besides other material support and establishment of temporary shelters in form of safe houses for survivors and those at risk. STERN WARNINGS For weeks, it was clear that nothing much was forthcoming in form of an answer to the calls to deal with SGBV as part of the Covid-19 response. There was condemnation of SGBV and stern warnings to perpetrators, on few occasions during the Ministry of Health’s daily update on the Covid-19 situation. No other action, at least publicly from that direction, appeared to be taken in as far as the response to the calls by the women’s rights organisations were concerned. Today, however, it is in order to celebrate some progress and welcome news in efforts to provide essential service and access to police and justice for sufferers, and those at an increased risk, of SGBV. Most welcome is a step that Kenya Police has taken to aid victims and survivors of SGBV, including domestic violence. The Directorate of Community Policing, Gender and Child Protection has established a toll-free helpline where cases of SGBV can be reported and those affected get support. This gives hope that women and girls who are, and have been, at risk of domestic and sexual violence can comfortably seek support. It is critical that those trusted with running the police hotline are compassionate officers who will support and address, especially, sexual assault and domestic violence cases with utmost understanding and professionalism. Lack of empathy, victim shaming and -blaming are among the reasons that have kept women away from reporting rape, defilement and domestic violence to police. But there are police women, and a few men, who do a great job. In the good news corner too is the Makueni County government. Under Governor Prof Kivutha Kibwana, it becomes the first county to open a safe house for women and girls fleeing from SGBV. The pledge, by Deputy Governor Adelina Mwau, to protect the rights of women and girls now and after the pandemic is worth emulating by the other counties. Ms Rugene is a consulting editor and founder, The Woman’s Newsroom Foundation. nrugene@gmail.com @nrugene