Exactly 132 days ago when President Kenyatta fired Mwangi Kiunjuri as Agriculture Cabinet Secretary, he said he will remain independent and firm even as he promised not to go “anywhere”. The former tout and high school teacher, in his address to the media after he was shown the door, said that for every action there is an equal and opposite reaction, borrowing from the legendary scientist Sir Isaac Newton’s third law of motion. Many interpreted this to mean many things among them revenge against the President for the sacking, but they were wrong. Wednesday, Mr Kiunjuri launched his party, The Service Party (TSP) and pledged to champion the interests of Kenyans at the political high table. But even as he unveiled the new party, Mr Kiunjuri said that the road ahead will be bumpy politically and that there will be instances of harassment along the way. “We are aware that this journey will not be smooth. There will be harassment along the way but we will soldier on until we reach our destination with Kenyans,” Mr Kiunjuri said. He noted that the timing for the launch was perfect as world over, parties start reorganising themselves two years to an election. The party, which became the 82nd political party to be registered in the country, has yellow, white, red and navy blue as its official colours with a heart (red) inside a circle (yellow) as its symbol. “This symbol is our promise to serve the people of Kenya,” he said, noting that the party intends to get even more active once the Covid-19 restrictions are lifted. The immediate activities of the party will include a countrywide recruitment drive that will pave the way for grassroots and national elections for its officials. The former Agriculture CS also ruled out the possibility of seeking the Laikipia gubernatorial position in the 2022 election under his new party. Though this could be interpreted to mean that he may be going for the presidency, Mr Kiunjuri said that he may push the agenda of TSP even in his position as chairman. This could be buttressed by the fact that he recognized parties are formed to assume government and if not “to influence government policy.” “Kenyans should not think that they can only serve when they are elected,” he said, noting that the party will field candidates in all elective positions across the country. Mr Kiunjuri unsuccessfully contested the Laikipia governor seat in 2013 on the Grand National Union party. However, the party folded under President Kenyatta’s Jubilee Party ahead of the 2017 poll. At the time Mr Kiunjuri was close to the President. Wednesday, Mr Kiunjuri vowed that his party will never be “sold”. Karungu Wa Thangwa, who contested the Kiambu senate seat in the last election emerging second, said TSP will offer Kenyans a new alternative. “We are back. This is a party of the silent majority Kenyans,” Mr Thangwa said. 