Whenever I log onto the National Youth Council website, I see this phrase: “The National Youth Council is a semi-autonomous government agency that is charged with the responsibility of: Co-ordinating activities being undertaken by youth-focused non-state actors; lobbying for legislation on youth issues; promoting the inclusion of the youth agenda in public policy; promoting youth representation in decision-making bodies and promoting government empowerment initiatives targeting the youth. “The council acts as a ‘voice and bridge’ to ensure that government and other policy makers are kept informed on the views and aspirations of the youth.” This agency and the Ministry of Youth get allocations from the government every financial year but they can’t prove to the Kenyan youth or the national government what they do with all that money. All we see on their social media pages are expensive hotel meetings and lunches, followed by conferences, which never benefit the youth. Being very passionate about youth development, I feel let down by the fellows leading these ministries and organisations (I believe this is the view of every Kenyan young person). Theirs is to receive salaries, allowances and go home as Kenya faces an unemployment crisis and despite having all the resources. They have not created any single policy or legislation that can be of help to the Kenyan youth or even fight for existing policies and legislations to be fully implemented. This organisation is supposed to be fighting for 30 per cent procurement allocations to the youth for the benefit of young entrepreneurs. But it has been mum and seems not to know what to do. The government too has denied youth jobs and has failed to promote and mentor them as part of a succession plan for parastatals even as many middle-level and senior managers routinely retire. What did we do to this government? Could the government be the enemy number one to the youth? It’s clear we are staring at an unemployment crisis and we need action now, not tomorrow. The first step should be to disband the National Youth Council as it is not serving the interests of the youth. Secondly, the government, should declare youth unemployment in this country a national disaster and initiate appropriate measures to address it. Raymond Matata is  an  activist and executive director of Youth Now; raymondmatata@yahoo.com