A section of residents in Uriri, Migori County have accused local administrators of carting away government relief food meant to cushion the vulnerable from hunger during the coronavirus pandemic. The locals faulted the area chiefs of taking away rice distributed by the Uriri Constituency CDF office in the sub-county last week.  Residents told the Nation that the administrators had enlisted close relatives as beneficiaries in the food programme while sidelining needy cases.  Mr Hellen Awino, a 62-year-old grandmother, said she did not benefit from the rice distributed to needy families despite promises from the administrators she would be one of the beneficiaries.  “I expected to get a share of the food after my name was listed as a potential beneficiary but sadly I only came to realise during the distribution that my details were missing,” said Mrs Awino. Mr Bernard Ochieng,  a resident, accused the administrators of failing to distribute the foodstuff to residents as was promised.  “Our local administrators are giving residents a raw deal. I know of a case where a government employee took home five kilogrammes of relief rice instead of distributing it to needy families.  Mr Ochieng said the administrators were taking advantage of the situation in the absence of the deputy county commissioner who is away on leave.  The locals appealed to area MP Mark Nyamita and Migori County Commissioner Joseph Rotich to investigate the matter and ensure the administrators face disciplinary action.  “We want the matter addressed, we cannot have government officials taking advantage of relief food meant for needy families to benefit themselves,” said Bernard Rumire, a resident of Oyani village. MP Nyamita said he had received the complaints and had sent a team to investigate the complaints.  “We will have the matter investigated and appropriate measures taken. "It sad that deserving cases are missing out on the food distribution meant to benefit the needy while government officials are misbehaving by taking away the food to their homes,” said Mr Nyamita.