Q: I work for a reputable organisation, and I have really enjoyed working from home. Now, it seems that many employers are encouraging staff to return to the office. My challenge is that I am not ready to go back yet. I am afraid I might expose my young family to Covid-19. How best can I approach this issue with my boss? It is always refreshing to see employees acknowledge and affirm their employers openly. We have all witnessed situations where employers move to secure their assets with little regard for the people who have helped them secure that wealth. I know of employees who have received no salary since April, and I know of others who have not missed their full salary to date, despite the fact that they have not been working as usual. I also know of a few that have even given their employees a pay increase, and others who have gone out of their way to pay half salaries even when their revenue streams are getting depleted. It is best to wait and see what guidelines your employer will provide regarding this. The guidelines already in place such as social distancing, wearing masks and sanitising hands regularly will still have to be observed for the safety of all staff. For an employer to meet these requirements, they are likely to either acquire more space, which is an expense they may not afford at the moment, or require employees to work in weekly or bi-weekly shifts. They could also allow those who would like to continue working from home to do so, thus solving your dilemma. But if this does not happen, the best thing to do is to approach your line manager, state your concerns, and reassure them of your commitment to the job. Your reasons need not only be about the safety of your family. You could also talk about better life-work integration, less time spent commuting to and from the office, or fewer interruptions by colleagues. If I were your line manager, I would look keenly at your productivity over the last few months. If you were always late in completing your tasks or to attend meetings, you can be certain that the discussion will not be easy. You better come up with a strategy of how you will turn your performance around. But if you have done your work diligently and delivered beyond expectation, it will be your employer’s loss not to grant your request. Go for it! Mwikali Muthiani - Managing Partner, MillennialHR, @MwikaliN