Robust debate I no longer read vigorous debate in the “To the Editor” page as I used to while a student in the 1980s. The letters on topical issues elicited vigorous rebuttals from other readers. This untrammelled exchange of views made the page a truly citizens’ page. It was from the letters page in all the newspapers that one could glean the pulse of the nation on the burning issues of the day. I don’t see letters supporting or opposing articles published in the newspaper. Nor do I see readers attacking or supporting the newspaper’s editorial. — Kennedy Buhere * * * Who’s puking? You’ve done a sterling job assessing Mutuma Mathiu’s interview of Uhuru Kenyatta (“Burning questions readers would have wanted Head of State asked” — Daily Nation, June 5). The NMG was outfoxed, outmanoeuvred and out-gunned. But you finish your article terribly. After promising to deliver the questions readers would have wanted asked, you start very well with the “most commonly asked” on DP Ruto. You then let me down with your ending statement: “The questions went on and on, almost ad nauseum.” Who’s being made to puke? You, Prezzo, NMG or us readers? — David Kehara * * * Social distancing The advertisement for Taifa Leo, “Taifa Leo Ndio Makao Makuu ya Kiswahili!” (See example in the Daily Nation of May 29, page 35), is inappropriate as it clearly sends the wrong message on the coronavirus. While the smiles of the two young ladies are very clear behind the masks, they are not practising social distancing — they are hugging. — Joseph Mariga, Nairobi * * * Sleeping on the job I refer to the story “Men and women who will spend your budget billions” (Daily Nation, June 8, pages 2-3). The development budget for Kenya is given as Sh637.6 trillion and the total budget Sh2.7 trillion. How could such a glaring error not be noticed? The quality control function at Nation is not in place. Somebody is sleeping on the job! — Daniel Muchiri * * * Goose is cooked I refer to the page one splash headline, “In Uhuru State House, a goose is cooking” (Daily Nation, May 29). I believe idioms were meant to be used in their original form. “His/her goose is cooked” is one example. — Dom * * * Improper English The story “Uproar as leaders flout Covid-19 rules” (Daily Nation, June 1, page 3) talks of leaders “blazingly breaching the Health ministry Covid-19 protocol”. The correct word is “brazenly”. The writer coined a non-existent expression. — Daniel Gichuru Njugi * * * NTV happy talk I disagree with the article “NTV’s Happy Talk” by Njoroge Kibe of Loitokitok (Daily Nation, May 29). Each anchor brings their own flair and adds their signature to the news. This adds a personal touch and engages the audience. Gone are the days when news anchors were stiff and boring, only reading out what was on the prompter. The anchors are human beings who have feelings and are, therefore, touched by the news they present — Anna Rosa, Nairobi I disagree with Mr Kibe that news anchors making offhand comments is unprofessional and should not be allowed. Sending seasonal greetings such as ‘For my Muslim viewers, have a great Idd” are appropriate if sent at the right time without bias. Such remarks help to create a rapport with the viewers. — Fridah Gatwiri, Meru I see no problem in these offhand remarks provided they are neither offensive nor irrelevant. The live comments are meant to break the boredom of the viewers, engage them as well as ease their anxiety. — Amhehi Daniel, Kisumu Send your complaints to publiceditor@ke.nationmedia.com. Call or text 0721 989 264