Kenya has more than 46,000 street children and families, a national census conducted in 2019 shows. The report, the first of its kind, was launched by Ministry of Labour and Social Protection Cabinet Secretary Simon Chelugui Wednesday. The project was led by the Street Families Rehabilitation Trust Fund (SFBTF), which was launched on March 11, 2003 to address the concerns of homeless, destitute and vulnerable people in urban areas. The Kenya National Bureau of Statistics (KNBS) and Unicef also took part. The exercise captured data on various aspects of street families, including the socio-economic and political factors behind their circumstances. “The information that we now have will go a long way in helping us to come up with evidence-based decisions on how best to deal with the challenges that street families face,” Mr Chelugui said. Some of the adversities street families face are limited access to basic healthcare, physical violence and poor living conditions due to lack of proper shelter. “In light of all these challenges, we look forward to the government and stakeholders utilising the findings in the census to come up with strategies for helping the street families,” KNBS manager Robert Buluma said. Government rehabilitation and reintegration services, it was noted, have contributed up to 40 per cent of all those rehabilitated. It is followed closely by non-governmental and faith-based organisations, which account for 22.7 per cent of rehabilitated cases. Corporal punishment, the report says, is the chief reason for children aged between 15 and 19 years going to the streets. For those aged between 10 and 14 years, 33.5 per cent go to the streets due to peer influence. Another 28.2 per cent of the same age group are influenced by their parents living in the streets. Hands full With its mandate including coordinating rehabilitation activities and mobilising resources, SFBTF has its hands full. “The board is now working on policy formation that will inform the creation of an Act of Parliament to address street families’ rehabilitation,” SFBTF chairperson Chebii Kilimo said. Ms Kilimo lauded the census as a milestone in helping the fund to come up with a concrete plan for expanding the capacity of rehabilitation centres across the country. She also urged Kenyans to support people living in the streets. “The greatest poverty is not the lack of food, but rather the lack of love and support,” she said. CS Chelugui said Sh144 million has been used to rescue about 1,000 street families. People living with disabilities were not included in the census as they were accounted for in the Inua Jamii initiative. In the 2020/21 budget estimates,  Sh231 million has been allocated to SFBTF to support 29 rehabilitation centres.