Two people have denied charges of being in possession of ammunition and transporting it without lawful authority in Mandera. When they appeared before Mandera Senior Resident Magistrate Kimani Mukabi, Mr Hassan Maalim Adan alias Hassan Ali and Mr Ali Ibrein Abdi denied the two charges. They were charged that on June 18, 2020 in Rhamu Dimtu, Mandera North, jointly and without lawful authority or excuse, were found in possession of twelve rounds of ammunition without a valid firearms certificate. They were also charged with transporting the ammunition on a motorcycle registration number KMEP 227M without a valid movement permit being issued by a licensing officer. PROBATION REPORT In his ruling, Mr Mukabi asked the probation officer to prepare a pre-bail report before he decides on the bail terms. “In view of the nature of the charges, I direct the probation officer to prepare and file a pre-bail report on Friday for further direction and fixing of a hearing date,” he said. In another matter in the same court, three suspected gunrunners were charged with planning to commit a felony. Mr Abdullahi Osman Mohamed, Mr Hassan Abbey Kalamoi and Mr Abdigafar Abdikadir denied the charge. They were charged that on June 13, 2020 in Kapedo, Mandera East they were jointly found preparing to purchase 10,000 rounds of ammunition without a firearms certificate. The three are said to have approached Jubbaland military officers camping in Mandera seeking to acquire the ammunition. In a sworn affidavit, police asked the court to deny the three bail or bond arguing that they are a flight risk. WITNESSES “We apply to have the suspects denied bond because they will interfere with witnesses in this matter and furthermore, our two crucial witnesses have threatened not to come to court in case the suspects are released on bond,” said Mr Johnes Nyangige in the affidavit. The three have been in police custody since June 13 after the court allowed the police to hold them to conclude investigations in the matter. Senior Resident Magistrate Kimani Mukabi asked the probation officer to prepare a pre-bail report before ruling on the bail terms. The matter will be mentioned on Friday.