This week, Kenyans watched the Senate floor turn into a brawling arena as members from both sides competed to determine who had the greatest shouting range. What began as a procedural motion to determine the fate of Kirinyaga Governor Anne Waiguru quickly descended into a cesspool of chaos as those opposed to the formation of a Senate committee accused those opposed to the plenary hearing of masquerading as cleaning detergents without a Kenya Bureau of Standards licence. This is not the first time the two Houses of Parliament have been turned into madhouses. The only difference between what we saw in the Senate this week and a wrestling match is that the sports wrestlers have the courage to display the names of their sponsors on the front of their shirts. HONOURABLE MEMBERS There is a reason parliamentarians are referred to as honourable members. Their behaviour in and outside of the chambers should bring honour to their office and dignity to the public who sent them to duty. We did not elect anyone to go shout at anyone else in Parliament. If Kenyans wanted representatives whose only expertise is in foul language, we would have elected the bubbles coming out of a biogas digester to represent us. We have consistently been reminded that violence exists in many forms and verbal is one of them. These are the people Kenyans are banking on to pass anti-violence laws yet their mouths are quick to issue verbal missiles each time a controversial motion is presented for debate. If our legislators cannot walk the talk on small matters like verbal abuse, how do we trust them with important national issues like asking President Uhuru Kenyatta to build bridges between the Executive and the Judiciary? WORKPLACE BULLYING What we saw in the Senate this week is the poster image of workplace bullying. Had that verbal exchange happened in any other place of work, the human resource manual would have been thrown at the culprits. The speakers of the National Assembly and the Senate must, as a matter of urgency, stamp out the unruly behaviour that has become synonymous with their areas of jurisdiction. If these bad manners by our legislators are allowed to continue, we may be forced to hide our children each time the live feed from Parliament is on because we do not want problems with Dr Ezekiel Mutua of the Kenya Film and Classification Board. The current crop of legislators must be reminded that we have many noble Kenyans out here who are interested in cleaning our brand of toxic politics, but get discouraged from presenting themselves on the ballot each time MPs turn the floor of the House into a bullying yard. When we asked our representatives to show us the sweat of their brow that justifies earning taxpayers’ money, we did not mean that they should shout at each other till their glands start discharging salty substances. We are yet to come across any MP who said in their manifesto that they should be elected to exchange words in Parliament. All we saw were people promising to build bridges, expand classroom blocks, put more money in the pockets of those in the informal sector and ask why our children haven’t received the laptops they were promised when Uhuru Kenyatta and William Ruto were still wearing the same office uniform. STAMPEDE There are many things representatives should fight over, but determining the political life of one individual isn’t one of them. If they had bothered to ask, Kenyans would have given them a never-ending list of things we would love to see them argue about. We want them to discuss who wanted to steal the Personal Protective Equipment (PPEs) the people of China donated to us the other day; why those who ate the Arror and Kimwarer dam money are still out here cat-walking like peacocks and when the report on the Kakamega Primary School tragic stampede will be finally released to the public. When the Ministry of Health warned us to start preparing for a new normal, Kenyans expected our legislators to shed their old skin of confrontation and wear a new one of maturity and dialogue. Kenyans would want to know from the Speakers of both Houses if this trend is the new normal so that we petition them to pass a supplementary budget purposely to provide funds towards guarding our ears from getting grated and our eyes becoming sore from the scenes in Parliament. During this period when Treasury is struggling to balance its budget, Kenyans are asking if we still need both Houses of Parliament if all we get is heckling when we could save all that money by buying a second-hand loudspeaker instead. The author comments on topical issues; gabriel.oguda@gmail.com