Last Friday, the Sports Disputes Tribunal heard a case in which the Kenyan Premier League and Chemelil Sugar have opposed Football Kenya Federation’s decision to end the 2019/20 top-tier season. In the meantime, Gor Mahia appear to have been stealthily confirmed as Kenya’s representatives in the Confederation of African Football (Caf) Champions League for the 2020/ 21 season. Oppose the case jointly This after Caf released a shortlist of clubs already qualified for its two flagship competitions with Gor Mahia highlighted as Kenya’s representatives. On Friday, advocates representing the Kenyan Premier League (KPL), Football Kenya Federation (FKF) and other interested parties — which include several other KPL clubs — made their oral submissions virtually under a Zoom session moderated by Sports Disputes Tribunal (SDT) chairperson John Ohaga. Interestingly, Tusker, Zoo, Western Stima, Kariobangi Sharks, Ulinzi Stars, KCB and Kisumu All Stars, who are co-joined as interested parties, oppose the case jointly submitted by KPL and Chemelil. During the hearing, Kakamega Homeboyz, who are also listed as interested parties, were represented by sports journalist Milton Nyakundi, and this was vehemently objected by the advocate representing Tusker, Zoo, Western Stima, Sharks, Ulinzi, KCB and Western Stima, Japheth Munyendo, who argued Nyakundi was not a registered lawyer, lacked the audience before the Tribunal and, therefore, could not purport to represent any party. It was his contention that Nyakundi could only appear in person as an interested party and any his representation offended the Advocates Act and practice rules. Munyendo also revealed that Amos Otieno Akoth, who was representing KPL, did not have a practising certificate by the time he had filed his case and, therefore, his pleadings were defective. Not sanctioned He argued that KPL, being a juristic person, had not sanctioned the institution of the suit nor appointment of the said advocate to represent it. Ohaga, however, allowed Both Otieno and Nyakundi to present their submissions asserting that the tribunal would ascertain the eligibility of the duo and make its ruling on the case on June 30 at 2:30pm.