 Several buildings built on the railway reserve have been marked for demolition in Karatina town. Kenya Railways Corporation (KRC) on Saturday pulled down hundreds of other structures which had been erected by traders near the railway line. The demolitions came after a standoff between more than 2,000 traders and the corporation. KRC had issued a notice to vacate the reserve to facilitate rehabilitation of the Nairobi-Nanyuki line. EVICTION Last week the traders were served with a “final" notice to vacate failure to which they would be forcibly ejected. Tension started building up early Saturday morning when a at least 50 armed police officers and the dreaded National Youth Service bulldozer arrived at the site and started pulling down the structures. There was commotion as traders rushed to salvage their merchandise to avoid being destroyed. The exercise was supervised by senior Kenya Railways officials, Mathira East Deputy County Commissioner Patrick Meso and senior police officers. As the demolition exercise went on, KRC officials were busy mapping out some buildings in the town that are allegedly built on railway land. Twelve buildings, six of them high-rise residential apartments including a church had been marked for demolition.  Some tenants told Nation they had been given 30 days to look for alternative accommodation. In a related incident, at least thirty kiosk owners lost goods worth millions of shillings after their structures were demolished.   Mr Patrick Wachira Wamumbi, who said he had lost goods worth Sh1 million, described the demolition as inhuman and travesty of justice because. He said the kiosks were legally allocated to them by the Nyeri County government. “This is inhuman, they (KRC) could have served us with a notice if indeed we had erected the kiosks on the railway land reserve, we had invested a lot of money in the kiosks,” he said The standoff has seen KRC Managing Director Philip Mainga visit the area several times in a bid to resolve the matter that had sucked in local leaders including Mathira MP Rigathi Gachagua and Nyeri Senator Ephraim Maina. 