Philip Waruinge takes out a tattered lace handkerchief from his pocket to mop his wrinkled face, his advanced age easily discernible. “I just think I’m neglected, like really neglected,” he seems to say, quietly. His weather-beaten clothing seem to agree and speak of the untold suffering. When he starts to talk about his journey in the world of boxing that started at the cradle of boxing in Kenya, the ‘Madison Square Garden Gymnasium’ located at Nakuru Amateur Boxing Club in 1960, it sounds like an introduction to the biography of a legend, regarded the best Kenyan boxer of his generation. He is one of the heroes of Kenya’s boxing history and his experience, accumulated wisdom and understanding of boxing is amazing. Listening to him talk is like watching a great boxing movie dubbed ‘The Rise and Fall of Philip Waruinge.’ Unluckily for him, those who run boxing in Kenya may never think of telling his story. After a sterling career decorated with glittering silverware, Waruinge has nothing to show for it. Not even a single medal he won is physically available to be shown to his grandchildren and his great grandchildren that he is lucky to see from the blessings of his four children — Lucy, Nancy, Andrew and Tom. Waruinge is the first born in a family of four children — three boys and one girl — and is married to Mary Ndeti. His stellar achievements in the ring spanning nearly 50 years were the light bulbs that made Kenya shine in the Olympic Games, Commonwealth Games and at the All Africa Boxing Championships.Despite such great achievements, Waruinge’s life today is full of pain and despair.  He is as poor as a church mouse. “This is the painful cost of being the pioneer of Kenya’s boxing. No one bothers to know where I live. Nobody treats you well. You’re viewed as a liability to the society. Nobody thinks you deserve respect and honour,” he says. Not even his next door neighbours are aware of a great boxing hero in their midst. Yet this is the man who made Kenya proud by winning medals including seven gold medals, one silver, two bronze and four best boxer trophies in global competitions. Waruinge wrote history by becoming the first African boxer to win the coveted Val Barker trophy after losing to eventual gold medalist, Mexico’s Antonio Roldan, in a controversial semifinal bout of the 1968 Olympics Games held in Mexico. The trophy, which is a dream of any boxer at the Olympic Games, is named after the Englishman who was president of the International Boxing Association (AIBA). The trophy is awarded to boxers who win gold medals at every Olympics since 1938 and it goes to the most outstanding boxer “for demonstration of excellence in the ring.” Since Waruinge won Val Barker trophy at the age of 24, more than half a century ago, it has never returned to African soil. “Mexico Olympics is still fresh in my mind. I remember chaos nearly erupted on the ring side as spectators booed the judges’ decision to deny me victory,” recalls Waruinge. In the spirit of sportsmanship, Waruinge accepted the judges’ verdict. “I remember coach Peter Mwarangu telling me not to greet my opponent. I defied his instructions in the spirit of sportsmanship,” Waruinge  told Nation Sport at Umoja Estate in Lanet on the outskirts of Nakuru Town. Waruinge, who was born in Kahuhia, Murang’a County, 75 years ago recalls how just before the bout, a Ghanaian judge came to his dressing room and told him to fight “like that was his last bout on earth.” It was as though the Ghanaian knew the final verdict would not be fair. “Out of the five judges, three were from communist countries. The other two were from Israel and Canada and it was therefore impossible for me to get a fair verdict,” said Waruinge. He atoned for this ‘robbery in the ring’ by winning a medal in the 1972 Munich Games in Germany. He ventured into professional boxing in Japan in 1973 and registered 14 wins, lost three bouts and drew one. The excellent fighter threw in the towel in 1986. Today as he remembers the past, grief has replaced his usual laughter. “This eye was damaged as I carried the Kenya flag in global competitions.  Since I came back in 2004, not a single government official has ever bothered to find out how I’m fairing on with life,” he says. “I’m in my sunset years. I don’t know when I will get the final round call from my maker,” he says as he wipes a tear on his damaged left eye, his face turning pink. Waruinge suffered a fractured eye socket in professional boxing in Japan. He underwent two surgeries in Japan, but that did not save his left eye from going totally blind. “I implore the hardworking Cabinet Secretary for Sports Amina Mohammed to hear my cries.” Waruinge speaks in a shaky voice, exposing an ageing dental formula that has many gaps of fallen teeth. “Who are true heroes of this country? Is it the githeri man? Does the government want to recognise me posthumously?  Will I go through this untold pain and sorrow until I breath my last?” “Some of my visible scars like this damaged eye hurts me when I rewind the history clock.” “It hurts to talk like this at a time when I’m supposed to inspire young boxers who are our future hope.” He says he depends on Sh2,000 stipends for the elderly that government dishes out to senior citizens aged 65 and above. “This house belongs to my last born son Tom who is in Japan. Without him, I would be in the streets begging.” “At my age I’m supposed to be enjoying my retirement peacefully at the countryside grazing my cattle,” he says as he uproots an overgrown weed in backyard garden where relieves his stress. “I have never received a single coin from the government. The Sh2,000 I get is because of my age and not because of my achievements in the ring.” “I urge President Uhuru Kenyatta whom I first met at State House, Nairobi when he was seven years old just when I presented his father Mzee Jomo Kenyatta with Val Barker trophy in 1968, to hear my cries.” Waruinge is probably one of the most admirable and kindest people in boxing circles in Kenya today. “Waruinge was a generous boxer. He paid Sh300 for my school fees at St Joseph Primary School and I did Kenya Advanced Primary Examination (KAPE) and I joined Nakuru Day Secondary School,” said former Kenya boxer Philip Mainge. Unlike other boxers of his time, his memory is good. Age is fast catching up with the former. He is the only athlete in the history of boxing in Kenya to have participated in three successive Olympic Games. His debut Olympic Games was Tokyo in 1964 where he represented Kenya in flyweight with three others, namely Mwangi Mugo (welterweight) and the late Ali Juma (featherweight). “I was 19 years old and the youngest boxers at the 1964 Tokyo Olympic Games,” he recalls. Waruinge went on to win a medal in two Olympic Games – bronze (in Mexico, 1968) and silver (in Munich, 1972) in featherweight category. After winning Val Barker trophy, he went to US in a trip sponsored by the International Boxing Association (AIBA) where promoters wooed him to join the paid ranks. “I wrote a resignation letter to the army headquarters in Nairobi while I was in the USA because I worked as a soldier with Kenya Army (now Kenya Defence Forces) at Lang’ata Barracks but my resignation was rejected. That is how I lost my first opportunity to turn professional,” said Waruinge.  His attempt to turn professional landed him in a military prison for 42 days. “Major Cromwell Mukungusi intervened on my behalf by talking to the then Chief of Defence Joseph Ndolo after I promised to win a medal in Munich Olympics,” recalls Waruinge. “I won a silver medal and I was discharged from Armed Forces unconditionally. The following year I turned professional in Japan.” But life in in Japan was not a bed of roses. “I ventured into the business of exporting electronic goods and in less than a year, my entire savings went up in smoke. I started doing manual jobs to put food on my table,” says Waruinge. He later opened a bar which also did not do well. “I registered the bar in the name of a Japanese woman as foreigners were not allowed to do business in Japan. Due to language barrier, the business went under after I failed to renew the license and I was deported. I didn’t carry anything back home. Not even my medals.” He says he received cold reception from family members when he returned home. “Instead of consoling me, they asked how many vehicles I had come with from Japan and the number of houses I had built. Some accused me of squandering the savings with women in Japan.” He won Sh2million in his debut professional fight but he lost the money due to language barrier. “This forced me to learn Japanese which today I speak fluently,” he added. Interestingly, when he won the Val Barker trophy, his photo was used as a historical logo in the postage stamp by Postal Corporation of Kenya without his consent. “I was never consulted nor was I compensated,” he says, bitterness written all over his face. Waruinge says his boxing talent was discovered by Irish coach Maxie MacCullough in Nakuru in the 1960s. MacCullough had converted a disused garage into a boxing ring. At one time, nearly half of the national team that participated in the 1968 All Africa Boxing Championship in Lusaka, Zambia, was made up of boxers from Nakuru. Nakuru boxers in the team included Waruinge (featherweight), his brother Samuel Mbugua (bantam), Francis Mbagara (lightweight), Lawrence Kariuki (light fly) and the late John Kamau (fly). Waruinge beat Ugandan Mohammed Muruli in the final to clinch a gold medal. Kariuki claimed a silver medal. Kenya finished fourth overall. The rest of the Kenya squad comprised of Stephen Thega (light middleweight) who won a gold medal, Stephen Kimbo Matiani, John Olulu, Hassan Abdallah, Alex Oundo, Patrick Watenanga and Peter Munene.  His boxing journey started when coach MacCullough went on a mission to scout budding boxers in primary schools around Nakuru town in the early 1960s.When coach MacCullough made his next stop at St Theresa’s Primary, many pupils volunteered to join boxing but Waruinge was not interested. However, his head teacher, a Mr Okello, insisted that he should join. “I was a football team captain. Boxing was not my passion. That is how my journey of boxing started.” Waruinge started his early schooling at Maziwa nursery school and then proceeded to Manyatta Primary School now St Paul’s Primary School before joining St Theresa’s Primary. He then proceeded to Uganda for his Form One studies at Namiliango Secondary School. “I only learnt for one term as my parents could not afford return ticket to Uganda,” he said. He still maintains his light workout as he wakes up at 8am in the morning and skips the rope for two hours to keep fit. His most memorable match in Japan was a championship belt fight which he won by majority points against a Japanese. He faulted the current crop of boxers for being overly ambitious. He said his toughest challenger in the local scene during his heyday was Mohammed Noor from Pumwani in Nairobi. “Noor was an experienced boxer and gave me a good run for my money every time we met,” added Waruinge. His secret to success? “I owe it all to my all-time best coach MacCullough. He taught me how to mount a tight guard, footwork and punching skills and releasing damaging hooks correctly.” “Maxie was a gifted boxing coach and that is why he managed to nurture many talents in Nakuru.”  He insists the standards of local boxing have plummeted due to poor leadership.