Nakuru County Assembly is set to debate Sh201million Supplementary Appropriation Bill ahead of the 2020/2021 financial estimates next week. The Bill that was tabled at the Assembly on Tuesday by the Deputy Speaker Samuel Tonui, is the second Appropriation Bill to be tabled at the House this financial year ending on June 30. The chairperson of Budget and Appropriation Committee Joel Karuri, in a memorandum attached to the Bill, said that the Appropriation Bill was crucial before the current financial year ends in the next 14 days. “The Supplementary II Appropriation Bill, 2020 makes provision for giving statutory sanction for public expenditure for the year ending on June 30 on the basis of the Supplementary estimates of recurrent and development expenditure for the financial year 2019/ 2020 for the appropriation of those amount,” said Mr Karuri. SALARIES The huge chunk of the funds will be used for salaries and expenses for department of Water, Environment, Energy and natural Resources which has been allocated Sh801,551. At least Sh3.4million will be used for capital expenditure for department of Trade, Industry, Markets and Tourism. The salaries and expenses for Office of the Governor Lee Kinyanjui and his Deputy Erick Korir has been allocated an additional Sh3.5 million. “This money includes executive members and Disaster Management,” read the Bill. Besides recurrent expenditure, the office of the governor has also been allocated an additional Sh3.5 million for development. The department of Health including Public Health and refuse collection has been allocated Sh4.2 million for salaries and other expenses. REVENUE COLLECTION The county revenue collection for the current financial year is set to dip by nearly Sh1 billion due to the outbreak of the coronavirus pandemic. The county depends on trade licenses and most of the traders and hospitality sector players have been forced to shut down with more than 1,500 hotels closing down. The small scale traders in the county who also contribute revenue for the county and operators in the transport sector have been relocated from their traditional operating base as the county enforced social distancing guidelines to combat the spread of the virus.