A group of travel agents have accused the acting Supreme Council of Muslims (Supkem) chairman Hassan ole Naado of misappropriating council funds. The Association of Hajj and Umrah Kenya, a travel agent that takes Muslim pilgrims to Saudi Arabia, has written to the Director of Public Prosecutions Noordin Haji to investigate Mr Naado. The agency has accused Supkem official of misusing funds paid through agents to arrange pilgrims’ travel to Saudi Arabia. TRAVEL TO MECCA Every year, thousands of Muslim pilgrims apply for visas through agents working under Supkem to travel to Mecca in Saudi Arabia. The association’s chairman Sheik Ali Gure on Saturday said Mr Naado should not stop accusing the association of embezzling Hajj funds whose payments were made through Supkem. “This funds are collected from pilgrims by the agents and deposited in the account of Supkem,” said Mr Gure. The association has challenged Mr Naado to explain how funds were mismanaged by the council under his watch. “If Mr Naado has any issues with individual agents, he should prove his allegations to relevant agencies and stop tarnishing the names of the agents,” he said. Mr Gure said financial discrepancies in the use of Hajj funds have been brought by Supkem’s own audit firm.  Mr Al Amin Ganzel, the secretary-general of the organisation, said the association has written to the Registrar of Societies to question the legitimacy of Mr Naado as Supkem acting chairman. MISMANAGEMENT “With all the blatant mismanagement of Hajj funds and the toxic corruption level in Supkem, already close to 66 agents filed a case at High Court to detach themselves from Supkem,” he said. Mr Naado, however, denied being investigated by DCI over loss of funds. He said investigations on results of audit of Hajj accounts of Supreme Council of Kenya Muslims for 2017-2018 were done before he took office. He said the Supkem has developed mechanisms to vet travel agents in accordance with the government requirements. He said the travel agents have driven the organisation into a debt of Sh823,000 through fake bank documents. On Thursday, Mr Naado was reported to have been questioned at the DCI headquarters over the alleged loss of funds. “Being questioned by the DCI does not mean I am involved, I am ready to give answers where need be and I will not allow the council’s money to get lost under my watch,” he said He accused bogus travel agents of swindling Supkem through fake documents from the bank. “Some of these agents have no moral rights to operate and I have blacklisted them from business,” he said.