World marathon record holder Eliud Kipchoge stepped up his Covid-19 food relief mission, this time showing up in his Nandi County backyard to support vulnerable families on Friday. Through his Eliud Kipchoge Foundation, and with support from Madhvi Dalal and her family - who run an initiative supporting menstrual health, sexual and reproductive health rights – the Olympic marathon champion donated food to 70 families. The mission was at Kipchoge’s backyard in Kapsisiywa, Nandi County, and also saw 30 families benefiting from solar kits donated by Azuri Technologies. The food items handed to each family includes blankets, maize and wheat flour, cooking oil, sugar, rice and reusable sanitary pads. Kipchoge said he saw it wise to give back to his local community who are also going through hard times in this period of the coronavirus pandemic as a way of appreciation for the support they have been giving him. Kipchoge has already distributed food in Kericho, Kapsabet, Eldoret, Iten and Kaptagat. He said it was time to head home. “I have been doing this for the last one month and today, I decided to go back home because they say ‘East or West, home is the best.’ “Many families are suffering and the food we have distributed today will keep them going for a few days,” said Kipchoge. He said there have been positive reactions from other stakeholders and corporates, but those suffering are many hence the need for more support. “I want thank those who have supported me in this initiative, because, as you have realized, we are now giving food to the vulnerable families apart from the athletes and there is need for more support. I would urge anyone who has something to come forward and donate,” he said. With more support, Kipchoge said that he is ready to travel across the country and donate more food to vulnerable families and sportspeople. “If we get more support we shall distribute the food across the country and use that chance to teach the public about the effects of the virus and the need of practicing social distancing and wearing their masks all the time.”said Kipchoge. Dalal, who used the chance to educate women on how to use the reusable pads, said that they are happy to have met with the marathon legend and they would always love to support the community through the initiative. “As a family we are happy that we managed to support other 70 families and with more donations we will always contact our hero and supply to those families in need,” said Dalal.