ODM leader Raila Odinga is caught up in a political dilemma over whether to fully be part of the Jubilee government or continue with his role as the de facto opposition chief. Mr Odinga has been working with the Jubilee administration courtesy of his March 9, 2018 ‘handshake’ deal with President Uhuru Kenyatta. This has seen his ODM party benefit from various National Assembly and Senate parliamentary committee roles. The sacking of deputy president William Ruto’s allies from parliamentary committees and their subsequent replacement with Mr Odinga’s men explains how deep rooted the ODM leader’s influence in government has become. Matters have been complicated by the split in ODM over the Division of Revenue Bill supported by the government but opposed by senators from Mr Odinga’s party. Mr Odinga is, however, reluctant to lead his brigade out of the opposition coalition National Super Alliance (Nasa) as this would automatically mean relinquishing his opposition role. This direction would have far reaching consequences as he would lose key parliamentary positions held by his ODM troops. ODM being the minority party in the National Assembly and the Senate holds key positions among them minority leader held by Suba South MP John Mbadi and Siaya Senator James Orengo respectively. Suna East MP Junet Mohammed, an ODM member, also holds the National Assembly minority chief whip position. The party also holds key committee positions courtesy of being the official opposition. There is clear separation of powers. Mr Odinga, however, argues that the Executive, Legislature and Judiciary have well-spelt-out roles in the country’s system. “In a presidential system, parliament as an institution is supposed to oversight the executive. It is not only the responsibility of minority party to oversight, even the majority party is part and parcel of the process of over-sighting,” Mr Odinga said Thursday. He said the media “must stop claims that opposition is weak as MPs play their role of oversight”. “Even those in majority party are playing their role and to say ODM is not doing its role, what about Jubilee? They also have a role to oversight that government.” He said ODM is both in opposition and in government only in the sense that “it controls 16 county governments and runs more than 16  county assemblies.” Mr Mbadi, the ODM national chairman, however, argues that their working with the government should not be misconstrued to mean defection. “We are working with the government courtesy of the handshake and this has brought together all the parties. Those against handshake are merely rebels and do not constitute a political party to purport that they can now perform opposition role,” Mr Mbadi told Sunday Nation. He added, “Let the Tangatanga team accept that the politics of the day has changed. They must know that ODM and other parties can now agree with a section of Jubilee and allow them to even share certain committees in Parliament. They should not misinterpret this to mean we have defected to government,” said Mr Mbadi. But Jubilee deputy secretary-general Caleb Kositany, a DP Ruto’s ally, insists that ODM cannot purport to continue performing the role of opposition while “flirting with the government”. “They should relinquish the role of opposition especially the chairmanship of Public Accounts Committee (PAC) and Public Investment Committee (PIC) and go and take other government positions,” Mr Kositany says. Ugunja MP Opiyo Wandayi (ODM) and his Mvita counterpart Abdulswamad Nassir (ODM) chair PAC and PIC committees respectively. “ODM needs to make a decision. Either they are in government or in opposition. As it is now, going by the body language, they have made a decision to be in government,” insists Mr Kositany. Generally, the Soy MP argued, there is a confused atmosphere in the political situation of the country and Mr Odinga owes Kenyans an explanation. Political analyst Javas Bigambo however, argued that Mr Odinga’s working relationship with President Kenyatta’s government has not eroded democracy. “It has, however, suffocated the power of opposition oversight of government, and killed the watchdog role of the opposition,” said Mr Bigambo. Mr Odinga, the analyst argued, has a strong support base that agrees with his working strategy with “Uhuru...and democracy is about the people's will.” “The most regrettable thing is that oversight affairs in Parliament as well as effect of checks and balances have been totally watered down,” Mr Bigambo said. Mr Kositany also insisted that minority cannot join the majority as that will leave no party offering checks and balances to the government. Belgut MP Nelson Koech said everything bad is happening in the country including violation of the constitution “because we have no vibrant opposition.” He accused Mr Odinga of being involved in an arrangement that is “unheard of in any democratic country across the world where an opposition goes to bed with Government.” “In fact, he is undoing the democratic gains he helped achieve in the early days. Raila's better days are behind him and he has realised that since he cannot beat them he joins them,” Mr Koech said. But ODM National treasurer Mr Timothy Bosire said some people were mistakenly getting the meaning of Mr Odinga and President Kenyatta’s working relationship different from what is intended. “The issues we are trying to address as per the handshake deal requires that the two principals work closely together including their foot soldiers.” jjochieng@ke.nationmedia.com