In recent weeks, given the change in our working patterns, there has been a sharp increase in the number of people exercising. May have picked up running which is cheap to engage in and requires little by way of equipment and venue. Running is an excellent form of exercise both mentally and physically. However, cases of runners picking up knee injuries are not uncommon. We will focus on runner’s knee which has frustrated many sports enthusiasts and is a common problem to them. Runner’s knee (patella chondromalacia) normally presents with pain at the front of the knee typically during or after exercise. Most people describe the pain as generally worse when running downhill or walking downstairs. It has been found to be more common in female athletes particularly those under 30 years of age. Most people who suffer from runner’s knee find that the pains start after a sudden sharp increase in both the volume and intensity of exercise. This could be the result of increased training for an elite event or the weekend warrior who suddenly takes up running. When an MRI scan is performed we observe inflammation of the joint surfaces (articular cartilage) particularly behind the knee cap. There may be associated swelling and fluid in the knee and inflammation of the joint lining. The first step in managing runners knee is to stop the aggravating activity and to have a period of rest. Applying ice over the joint  - avoid heat - in the acute phase is useful in reducing the inflammation as is use of simple painkillers (non-steroidal anti-inflammatory tablets). Physical assessment in the majority of people with runner’s knee reveals a common finding of subtle weakness or reduced muscle bulk of the thigh muscles, the gluteal muscles and also poor core strength. Both prevention and treatment of runner’s knee focuses on building these important muscle groups in order to improve control of the knee cap. A smaller group of individuals have been found to suffer from poor alignment between the knee cap and the femur. These individuals are at higher risk of  runner’s knee and treating their situation is slightly more complex. Physiotherapy input is required to strengthen the thigh muscles on the inside of the knee and use of physiotherapy tape has been useful in some cases. The use of knee braces remains controversial as there has not been any good evidence to show the benefit. Much as a small number of athletes with knee pain report positive results using them on a short term basis, we stress the importance of muscle building instead. In individuals where pain persists despite being able to strengthen the important muscle groups, surgical intervention may be required. This could involve realignment of the knee cap or undergoing knee arthroscopy to deal with damaged cartilage. In summary, for those who engage in occasional exercise, the important steps in managing runner’s knee are  taking a period of rest before gradually restarting activity and performing a variety of exercises including cycling and swimming. It is important to gently lose weight as increased loads through the knee could accelerate the damage to the cartilage. The good news is the pain from runner’s knee normally resolves allowing one to return to the desired level of sport. It is important to seek attention early in the process before there is irreversible cartilage damage which is a much harder situation to deal with.