Two suspects in the weekend killing of Nairobi resident Kevin Ombati Omwenga will spend Monday night in police custody pending a court’s ruling on an application for their detention for 14 days. Mr Robert Bodo Ouko and Mr Chris Obure appeared at the Kibera Law Courts on Monday morning. Police want them detained for this period to enable completion of the investigation. Sergeant Bashir Boya told Kibera Principal Magistrate Derrick Kuto of the fear that the suspects will interfere with key witnesses of the fatal shooting that occurred at Galana Suites in Kilimani estate on the night of August 21. Sergeant Boya also said police were yet to decide on the criminal charges to prefer against the two and that they had not taken statements from witnesses. He said police believed Mr Ouko shot Omwenga and that the firearm loaded with 13 bullets belonged to Mr Obure. “The witnesses are known to Mr Ouko. The results of the postmortem to confirm the cause of death are not yet out,” he said in his court papers. He added that after the shooting, Mr Ouko went to the offices of a private company known as Glo-Jet International at Senteu Plaza, and hid the gun there. The court heard that preliminary investigations revealed Omwenga was in his house with people including his relatives when Mr Ouko requested to leave for his home after having dinner. He then stood from his seat and went to his bedroom with Mr Ouko for a talk. After a few minutes, a gunshot was heard from the bedroom and Mr Ouko went out hurriedly, saying he wanted to rush somewhere. However, he was restrained by Omwenga’s brother as the others in the house went to the bedroom, where they found Omwenga lying in a pool of blood. The police officer said Mr Ouko then went to Glo-Jet’s offices and hid the gun, and later accompanied Omwenga’s friends and relatives to Nairobi Women’s Hospital, Hurlingham branch. Omwenga was pronounced dead on arrival. The suspect also accompanied the group to Kilimani Police Station to file an incident report. “The firearm belongs to Mr Obure, who is a licensed firearm holder. It is a mystery how Mr Ouko came to access it. The suspects’ release could lead to interference with the investigation,” Mr Boya told the court. He added that the detectives were yet to obtain the suspects’ crime records and take their fingerprints and DNA samples for analysis by the Government Chemist. They are also yet to take photographs for profiles and escort them to mental assessments. Investigators are also focusing on the ballistics examination of the firearm and obtaining records from the Central Firearms Bureau. They will analyse phone records from telecommunication service providers and forward their reports to the Cyber Crime Unit at the Directorate of Criminal Investigations (DCI). The suspects opposed the police application for their detention, saying they cannot interfere with investigations as CCTV footage and the firearm were in police custody. “The court has not been told how the respondents will interfere with evidence that is already in the custody of the DCI. It is the right of an arrested person to be released on bond or bail,” lawyers Kennedy Arum and Patrick Lumumba told the court. The lawyers, while dismissing the prosecution’s statement that their clients were arrested after presenting themselves to police in Kilimani and Kileleshwa, also noted that documents filed by Sergeant Boya were undated and unsigned. Mr Obure, through Prof Lumumba, fought police claims that the gun disappeared mysteriously, saying he is a licensed firearm holder. The lawyer said the application only refers to him in one sentence among the 17 paragraphs in reference to the issue of the firearm. Prof Lumumba also attacked police for going to the length of drafting the order that they wished the court to issue. “The prosecution is presumptuous, it has drafted orders they expect to be issued. This is reprehensible conduct,” said Prof Lumumba. The court will rule on the application at 2.30pm on Tuesday.