Over 200 residents of Bulapesa Ward on outskirts of Isiolo town will be issued with title deeds for their land as Governor Mohamed Kuti’s administration seeks to register 4,000 plots within the town. The governor said the land ownership documents for 294 plots in the populous ward have already been processed and will be issued in a month’s time. “We are hoping to cover 4,000 plots within Isiolo town and issuance of the 294 Bulapesa titles will start in a month’s time,” said Dr Kuti. He said the titling process will, among others, ensure residents develop their plots and help in resolving the protracted land disputes that have seen many residents defrauded of their land and others maimed in ensuing fights. Community land committees He said beaconing has already been done in the areas within the town and that the already established community land committees will assist in identifying land owners in the disputed areas for fair titling. While Isiolo has witnessed major developments since devolution came into place, land disputes continue to impede growth in the expansive county. The major developments including the Isiolo International Airport, town stadium, modern market and abattoir have attracted investors into the county which has seen appreciation of land prices and in turn attracted unscrupulous grabbers. Lack of title deeds, especially in the Isiolo town outskirts, continues to hinder development of residential and commercial properties due to the multiple legal battles that have left the plots idle. Land adjudication The county leadership is divided over recently amended legal notice that allows adjudication in townships and settlements but excludes Resort City, Lapsset Corridor, military and security installations, national reserves and holding grounds. Isiolo Senator Fatuma Dullo, Woman Rep Rehema Jaldesa, Nominated Senator Abshiro Halake, Deputy Governor Abdi Issa, Isiolo North MP Hassan Odha and his Isiolo South counterpart Abdi Koropu want the legal notice revoked and the process done afresh to allow adequate public participation on the matter.