Former Likoni legislator Masoud Mwahima is dead. He died on Monday night at his Vyemani home in Likoni Sub-county, Mombasa. The veteran politician passed on at around 11pm after suffering from asthma complications.  His family told the Nation that he suffered from asthma, for which he received treatment at St Thomas Hospital on Sunday. “We took him to hospital after he had complained of asthma yesterday (Sunday), and when we brought him back, he was okay. Today night when we were seated outside our home, we heard a long silence and when we went to check him, he was dead,” said his son Juma. Mr Mwahima, 78, was also fighting other illnesses that came with old age. His death comes just three weeks after that of former Changamwe MP Ramadhan Kajembe who succumbed to Covid-19. The two once served together in the National Assembly and were among veteran politicians at the Coast. Late former Changamwe MP Ramadhan Kajembe (left) with ex-Likoni MP Masoud Mwahima at the ODM Mombasa County delegates meeting, Sapphire Hotel on March 31, 2012. File | Nation Media Group Mr Mwahima was first elected to parliament in 2007/2008 on an ODM ticket and re-elected in 2013 where he served until 2016 when he ditched the party and joined Jubilee. He contested the seat on the Jubilee Party ticket in the 2017 election, but lost to current MP Mishi Mboko who won on an ODM ticket. Mr Mwahima moved to the ruling party after claiming that there were plans by ODM leaders in Mombasa to deny him the ticket. A week before he officially announced that he would decamp to Jubilee, Mr Mwahima caused a stir after he was photographed leaving State House Mombasa. Before being elected to parliament, Mr Mwahima served as the Shika Adabu councillor, the Mombasa municipal council deputy mayor and later as mayor from 1999 to 2002. He was also the chairman of Kanu in Likoni earlier in his political career. On Tuesday, Coast MPs and residents shared their condolences and took to social media to mourn the former legislator. “From God we shall return. This is the year of tragedy. Praise be to God. May Allah grant his excellency Mwahima a good place in the grave and the hereafter,” posted Kwale Woman Rep Zulekha Hassan. Jomvu MP Badi Twalib said: “On behalf of Jomvu Constitutency, I wish to express our condolences and prayers to the great people of Likoni for the loss of their Former MP Mzee Masoud Mwahima. May Allah Grant them patience and comfort to his immediate family at this trying times.”