Kenya announced Tuesday that 587 people had recovered from Covid-19, the highest number of recoveries in the country since it recorded its first positive case on March 13. Previously, the highest number of Covid-19 recoveries recorded was 570. The total recoveries now stands at 9,327. Of the 587 new recoveries 500 patients were on home-based care and 87 were in various hospitals across the country. During the coronavirus update Tuesday, Chief Administrative Secretary for Health Rashid Aman said 605 additional positive cases were recorded bringing the tally to 23,202. Of the 605 new patients, 528 were Kenyans and 27 foreigners, the youngest a two-months-old infant and the oldest 99. As of August 4, the country had tested a total of 322,923 samples for the new coronavirus. At the same time, the Ministry of Health announced that it has developed guidelines for the proper disposal of face masks and other gear used in the fight against coronavirus. Improper disposal has left an ugly trail of clinical waste on the environment, the ministry. It added that such improper disposal of the waste may be counterproductive in the management and prevention of the spread of SARS-Cov-2, the virus responsible for Covid-19. “While surgical masks keep the virus away, they are plastic-based, liquid-resistant products that have long afterlife when discarded,” Dr Aman said. “They end scattered if not well disposed of.” Dr Aman added that masks, which must be worn in public places, are being discarded carelessly. “They are everywhere – at markets, roadside, sidewalks, railway stations, parks, bus and matatu terminuses, construction sites and are becoming a common eyesore,” he said. This is despite the grim risk of transmitting the novel coronavirus. “Health experts say viruses and germs may remain attached to these disposed of masks for varying periods. Those who pick up the masks, particularly children, are at risk of infection. The masks blown by the wind are a danger to those who come into contact with them,” Dr Aman said. He urged citizens to be cautious when disposing of the masks, empty hand sanitiser bottles and soiled tissue papers. “In the midst of this pandemic, there may be a tendency not to consider the adverse health and environmental impacts of wanton and haphazard disposal of these products,” he said. “Littering and handling of Covid-19 medical waste poses a high risk of infection.” He added that these kinds of waste should not be burnt in the open “since it is risky and pollutes the environment”. Dr Aman said such waste should be collected, treated and disposed of properly so as not to affect humans, animals as well as ecosystems and biodiversity.