The idea of MPs passing a motion in the National Assembly to award former lawmakers a hefty monthly pension of Sh100,000 is a very reckless decision, says Ken Butiko. When people seek leadership, Ken adds, the motivation should be to serve others and not to reward themselves. “Our MPs have turned this principle around and now want us to serve them instead. President Uhuru Kenyatta should reject this Bill ,” pleads Ken, whose contact is kennedy.butiko@yahoo.com. *** There can be no justification for the MPs to endorse a whopping Sh100,000 monthly pension for themselves and their retired colleagues, remarks Gitonga Ndirangu. He argues that there are many civil servants who worked for 30 or more years and receive monthly pension of only Sh5,000. He poses: “What became of the requirement that only the MPs who have served for at least two terms qualify for pension?” His contact is ndirangugitonga@gmail.com. *** The recently introduced National Hospital Insurance Fund (NHIF) rule requiring self-employed members to make two years’ contributions upfront before qualifying for specialised hospital treatment is ridiculous and inhuman, says Richard Mang’ara. According to him, it flies in the face of the government’s Big Four agenda, one of whose key pillars is the provision of affordable health care. “Is the President aware of this?” His contact is mangarapeter@Yahoo.com. *** Regular contributor W. Kimariech feels aggrieved by the fate of the Cutting Edge in the new-look Nation and feels that only a football analogy can drive home his message. Says he: “The new design of the Watchman column is like a disputed goal for which we demand the intervention of the VAR because one of the players appeared offside. Watchman deserves prominence. Fans are never keen on watching second-division leagues!" His contact is wkimariech@gmail.com. *** Whereas most complaints about gender inequality are about the dominance of men, in the Office of Director of Public Prosecutions in Nakuru, the contrary is the case, says Maiko Sunzuki. “Here, nearly all the courts, including the High Court, are all manned by female state counsel.  And, if anyone disputes this, let the station head give a breakdown of the staff.” His contact is unitedpamoja@gmail.com. Have a gender-sensitive day, won't you!