The leader of Amani National Congress (ANC) has said that his presidency will fully involve the youth in decision making so as to improve their welfare. In a telephone interview with the Nation, Mr Musalia Mudavadi said that the country must empower the youth to realise accelerated growth because of their high numbers. "The youth are an important sub-system of any country in the world and Kenya is no exception. Young people must be encouraged to have greater participation in decision making to ensure public service delivery meets their specific needs," Mr Mudavadi said. He added: "My leadership will not be about tokenism. The youth must be part of decision makers. I will want to tap on the experience of the youth and through the use of technology make them help my government to move to the next level.” The ANC leader made the remarks a month after he was endorsed by his party delegates to vie for presidency in 2022. Last month, Mr Mudavadi became the first politician to be endorsed by delegates to succeed President Uhuru Kenyatta. In a conference that was convened on July 28, the ANC national governing council unanimously settled on the former vice president as its flag bearer for the 2022 contest. Mr Mudavadi expressed optimism that the Kenyan dream could easily be realised when the youth who make more than 72 per cent of the population were imparted with skills and knowledge to boost the economy. “The nation must invest in the education of the youth because they comprise the bulk of the workforce the country needs to spur economic growth," he said. Some of the challenges that Mr Mudavadi hopes to fix include, youth unemployment and investing in youth talent. "Graduates don’t have jobs and end up being boda boda riders. That is not an inspiration to the younger generation as we encourage the youth to take education seriously. We are importing expertise yet we have graduates with skills locally. “As a county, we must address the issue of politically driven youth policies that have no tangible outcomes," Mr Mudavadi said. He further said that he will support sporting activities in the country to be profitable ventures that can help in creation of job opportunities for the younger generation. Mr Mudavadi noted that Kenyan youth are the most marginalised, abused and misused. "Governments front youth agenda as a priority but the practice remains highly cosmetic," the ANC leader said. Mudavadi criticised some political parties for forming youth wings that end up being mercenaries, goons, hecklers and body guards. He said no political party has fronted youth in positions of leadership and decision-making. "Political marginalisation of the youth is systemic and deliberate to keep the youth out of mainstream leadership," he said. Mudavadi also encouraged the youth to find their worth and seek opportunities as opposed to waiting for politicians to ‘help’ them. He cited his entry into politics at an early age of 28, revealing that he became Finance minister at the age of 33. He also urged parents to take the education of their children seriously to make them become productive members of the society. Mr Mudavadi served as the seventh Vice President of Kenya in 2002 and as Deputy Prime Minister from 2008 to 2012. Through the Amani Coalition ticket, Mr Mudavadi unsuccessfully contested the 2013 presidential election. Mr Uhuru Kenyatta won the presidency. In the last General Election, Mr Mudavadi joined the National Super Alliance (Nasa) alongside Wiper’s Kalonzo Musyoka and ODM leader Raila Odinga, who bagged the ticket, but they lost again. They failed to clinch the top seat and fell out soon after with Mr Odinga striking a political truce with President Kenyatta now widely known as the ‘handshake’. Mr Mudavadi, who has severally maintained that his eyes are on the presidency in 2022, has ruled out the possibility of anyone outwitting him in the race to the State House. He says he will be vigilant in any negotiations and will not be taking anything other than a ticket to State House. Previously, the ANC has held meetings with leaders among them Narc-Kenya party leader Martha Karua and Dr Sally Kosgey who served as head of public service during former President Daniel Moi's regime, leaving observers guessing about a possible political alliance. Coming at a time when various politicians are seeking to run for presidency in the 2022 General Elections, the meetings were seen as part of political realignments. This comes when ODM, which worked with Mr Mudavadi's ANC in the 2017 elections, is seeking new partners ahead of 2022, amid a debate on post-election talks with the ruling Jubilee party.