Civil society organisations in Kakamega County have joined politicians in pressuring Governor Wycliffe Oparanya to fully account for Sh367 million in Covid-19 management funds from the national and county coffers. Lobby groups under the Kakamega CSO Network have petitioned the governor to publicly account for Sh262 million from the national government and Sh105 million from the county. Network chair Thomson Mate accused Kakamega of failing to make public the approved itemised budget for emergency response. “Section 91 of the County Governments Act (2012) obligates the county to establish modalities for citizen participation in the county government process,” he noted in a statement. “Despite these constitutional and legal responsibilities, we are concerned that Kakamega, having approved a supplementary budget to provide emergency response to the pandemic, and without the participations of citizens, has failed to publish and make it known to the general public the itemised expenditure lines to be approved for the emergency fund.” The demand came amid pressure from politicians who claim resources for fighting the virus were not being used. A section of county assembly members demanded full disclosure, transparency and accountability for the funds as well as grants and other donations. “If details about the spending will not be made public, we shall petition the Senate to conduct an audit to find out how the funds are being used,” said nominated MCA Linda Aseyo. Mumias East MP Benjamin Washiali called for an intensive probe into utilisation of the Covid-19 funds after reports emerged that some governors were awarding their relatives, family members and friends tenders to supply equipment at exaggerated prices. “It is unfortunate that there is no single mask donated by the county to the residents of Kakamega despite the receipt of millions of shillings from various quarters. We must be told how this money is being used.” Likuyani MP Enoch Kibunguchy wants part of the money used to supply water to schools in preparation for their reopening next year, in line with Ministry of Health guidelines for fighting the pandemic, which include proper and frequent hand-washing. "We should be proactive and plan ahead. Water should be made available in adequate quantities for regular cleaning and disinfection before our children are allowed into the learning institutions," he said. Kakamega Deputy Governor Philip Kutima noted that the Sh262 million from the national government was yet to be used. Prof Kutima said the county was using part of the Sh105 million allocated in its budget to provide emergency relief. He said the county was keeping the money for use in future in case the pandemic persists. "Since Covid-19 is still here with us, we are planning to budget the money up to the end of the year so that we don't run out of money to fight the scourge in Kakamega," Dr Kutima said.