Former Changamwe MP Ramadhan Kajembe was buried Saturday under strict Covid-19 protocols. Kajembe, who died on Friday, was laid to rest in Kwa Shee, Jomvu. The burial of the veteran politician, who was an MP for 15 years, lasted for nearly one and a half hours. Leaders who attended the burial included coast regional commissioner John Elungata, deputy police commander Joseph Chebii, Jomvu MP Badi Twalib, who is also Kajembe’s son-in-law and Mombasa County Assembly majority leader Hamisi Mwidani. Only a handful of mourners were allowed to attend the burial ceremony. During the burial, Mr Elungata read President Uhuru Kenyatta’s speech to mourners. In his speech, President Kenyatta eulogised Kajembe as a patriotic Kenyan and a great leader. “He was a forthright politician, a wise elder and accomplished trade unionist who over the years served the country with distinction in various capacities. “He was also a courageous servant of the people who sacrificed personal comfort to serve the country,” Mr Kenyatta said. The President further praised him as a leader who invested in education, health and business. He added that Kajembe contributed to key policies that have continued to serve the country and further termed him as a role model who should be emulated by other leaders. Kajembe’s second wife Zaharia died two weeks ago, with reports indicating that she suffered Covid-19 complications. The politician lost his first wife Aziza four months before Zaharia’s death. From 1997 when he first won the Changamwe parliamentary seat and subsequently defended it in the 2002 and 2007 elections, Kajembe’s name was synonymous with Mombasa politics. He won elections for 30 years, until 2013 when he was defeated in the senatorial race by former senator Hassan Omar. Kajembe started as a Kanu youth winger in the 1960s before serving as a civic leader in Mikindani Ward for 15 years. He servied in different capacities within the Mombasa Municipal Council. He was an MP for 15 years and was also the Kenya Ferry Service (KFS) board chairman. His son Seif Kajembe's attempt to win the Jomvu parliamentary seat was unsuccessful. He lost the race to Mr Twalib, a former Jomvu Kuu councillor.