The High Court in Nyeri has ordered police in Laikipia to return 107 herd of cattle which they recently driven from a homestead in Narasha village, Oldonyiro in Isiolo County. This is after the county government of Isiolo and two residents filed a petition before Justice Jairus Ngaah on July 31, 2020 seeking orders to compel the police to return the herd. In the petition, Inspector General of Police, Laikipia North OCPD and the Attorney-General were listed as respondents respectively. Mr Leteti Letimaas, Mr Lokidogoi Lekisiki and the county government of Isiolo, through their lawyer Zainab Jirma, further sought orders to compel the respondents not to displace residents of Narasha village. While delivering his ruling on the petition via ideo link on August 4, 2020, Justice Ngaah certified the case as urgent and granted the prayers sought by the petitioners. "...in the meantime, the second respondent (Laikipia North OCPD) is ordered to hand over the 107 herd of cattle to the applicant pending the hearing and determination of the present motion or until further orders of this honourable court," the judge stated. Displacement stopped Justice Ngaah also granted orders barring the displacement of residents of Narasha village pending the hearing and determination of the matter. He referred the matter to Nanyuki High Court, saying it is the jurisdiction where the incident occurred. "Due to the nature and volatile situation currently prevailing at the Isiolo and Laikipia county boarder, the conflict resulting from the impugned acts, this court be pleased to order Isiolo and Laikipia county commanders of police and county commissioners to ensure compliance of the order and ensure peace prevails," the petitioners’ lawyer said. Police recently held an operation to recover 83 herd of cattle that were stolen from a homestead in Tiamamut village in Kimanjo, Laikipia North. During the operation, 107 cows were confiscated from two residents of Narasha village. Stolen by bandits The animals were reportedly stolen by suspected bandits from Samburu East who are believed to have used the Oldonyiro route to access the village in Laikipia North. Residents led by Mr Lokidogoi Lekisiki are now accusing police of failing to return their cows as ordered by the court. "Since the court order was issued, we have not seen any of the respondents assuring to us that our cows will be returned. Simply, no action has been taken so far. The police used force by torching our houses and spraying bullets at my homestead while driving away my livestock. We need the Law to be followed to the letter," Mr Lekisiki told journalists in Narasha village. The residents were left homeless since their houses were tirched and all what they are left with are remains of spent cartridges. Blame game Isiolo North MP Hassan Odha and his Laikipia North counterpart Sarah Lekorere have in the recent been involved in blame games over the suspected banditry attacks along the border. Ms Lekorere called on the Director of Criminal Investigations George Kinoti to investigate Mr Odha over the incidents, claiming the bandits were originating from his constituency. “Instead of condemning these bandits, the leader (Mr Odha) is lauding them as if they did something good. The DCI boss should probe sentiments made by the leader. Instead of spreading rumours, he should record a statement with the police on what he knows," Ms Lekorere said recently. On his part, Mr Odha called for investigations on Ms Lekorere over the torching of houses in Narasha village in his constituency, claiming that it was a retaliatory attack. He claimed that about 300 residents were rendered homeless and called on Interior Principal Secretary Karanja Kibicho to take action against local politicians reported to be fuelling divisions between two local communities. “The two communities have been living together for many years in peace and what is happening is as a result of incitement by local leaders for political interests. Government administrators involved in the attack should not be transferred but arrested and arraigned,” Mr Odha said. The irate MP blamed the incident on disarmament of police reservists on the Isiolo side and complained that their Laikipia counterparts still possess firearms something which continues to threaten security at the area. “If the intention of this crime is to make us run away, it will never happen as we (leaders) will help them reconstruct houses and ensure there is enough security for them to continue living here,” he said while warning residents against retaliatory attacks.