A 22-year old woman is fighting for her life at Kenyatta National Hospital after she was shot six times by her boyfriend, a police officer in Igembe North, Meru County. Constable David Nyamweya is said to have summoned the woman to Laare Police station, where he sprayed her with bullets outside the canteen following a short quarrel. He had shot her in the stomach and legs by the time his colleagues intervened and disarmed him. Police confiscated the pistol and collected eight spent cartridges from the scene. A junior police officer who witnessed the Saturday night incident said the man, recently transferred to Kabachi Police Post some 20 kilometres away from Laare, excused himself from station guard duties, saying he needed to pick a jacket from his house. He then went to Laare, where he met the girlfriend, but a quarrel ensued and was followed by the shooting. "The officer said he would come back. He had his full uniform and a gun when he travelled to Laare," said the junior officer. Police officers took the woman to Meru Level Five hospital where she was referred to KNH in Nairobi. Area Deputy County Commissioner Charles Langat confirmed the shooting while area police boss Apolo Busolo declined to say if the officer was arrested after being disarmed. The woman’s distraught family and friends stormed Laare Police Station to demand justice. Her father said she had been living with the officer but that their relationship turned stormy after he was transferred. "She said the man had been beating her and was unhappy in the relationship. I talked to them and they reconciled. The two had visited my home and I had agreed to their relationship. I didn't expect it to result in this. I want justice for my daughter," he said. Her mother said she completed her secondary education last year and that they helped her to open a boutique at Laare, where she met the policeman. Her uncle faulted the police service for allowing officers to go home with their weapons. "We gave him our girl so they could live together, not to injure her. He has turned into an animal".