Battaash peaks at Glorious Goodwood, like no other course exists in his mind. On a smoking sunshine lit Friday, Battaash (Jim Crolwey 2-7), stamped a fourth King George Qatar Stakes, maintaining a reputation as the fastest on our planet. Glass Slippers and Ornate, were mere by-standers as Battaash, 6, trained by Charlie Hills for Hamdan Al Maktoum, sped along the Sussex Downs, unphased. He is personified wisdom both on looks and attitude. The son of Dark Angel is 10-11 for the Prix l'Abbaye and connections are cleverly keeping him to sprinting rather than sending him over a mile in the Breeders' Cup. A miniscule batch of essential personnel were allowed, but they drummed up a hero's chorus for Battaash. Television watchers were witness to his speed of 11.24 per furlong - unimaginable in Kenya. Unfortunately, the government's decision to cancel a trial of 5,000 spectators will cost the track a six-figure sum, according to its supremo Adam Waterworth, managing director at the Estate. Prime Minister, Boris Johnson, said there was no alternative, due to a sudden rise of infections. A postponement of two weeks is necessary to contain further cases: "At every point I have said our plan to reopen society and the economy is conditional, that it relies on continued progress, and we would not hesitate to put the brakes on if required. That means casinos, bowling alleys, skating rinks and the remaining close contact services, must remain closed. Indoor performances will not resume, pilots of larger crowds in sports venues and conference centers will not take place." *** Hall of Fame jockey Kent Desormeaux, who has been fighting alcoholism, has been excluded until further notice by management of the Del Mar Thoroughbred Club in California. Kent, 50, allegedly was involved in a fight on Del Mar fairgrounds property in an area where campers and trailers house racing staff during meetings. He has expressed a desire to become the all-time leading Cajun jockey. Retired Hall of Famer Eddie Delahoussaye leads his fellow Louisiana riders with 6,384 victories. Kent needs more than 300 to pass Eddie.