The Kenya Judges and Magistrates Association has lost a bid to stop Chief Justice David Maraga from suspending them in case of indiscipline or errant behaviour. Sitting at the Labour court in Nairobi, Justice Maureen Onyango, said the association did not prove that letters of interdiction, suspension or reprimand by the CJ had been issued unilaterally. She said the union not only failed to demonstrate to the court that any letter had been issued, but it also failed to show the issuance offended Articles 27(1) and 172 of the Constitution. The union moved to court in July last year through Musyoki Mogaka & Company Advocates challenging the powers of the Chief Justice to take disciplinary actions against judicial officers. The union said the powers to interdict and suspend a judicial officer ought to lie with JSC. Justice Onyango also rejected the union’s request to rule that suspension of judges and magistrates as per paragraph 16 of the Third Schedule (of Judicial Service Act, 2011) on a nil salary is inhumane, in-dignifying and hostile. The judge found that the suspension per se does not violate the Constitution, as argued by the union. They wanted the court to declare that the unilateral issuance of letters of interdiction, suspension or reprimand in the absence of the participation of the Judicial Service Commission offends Article 172 of the Constitution. They also wanted a finding that decision by CJ to discipline them threatens their rights to equal protection and equal benefit of the law. In her ruling, justice Onyango also ruled that the union failed to prove that some paragraphs of the Third Schedule Judicial Service Act, 2011 are inconsistent with Articles 47 and 50(2) of the constitution. The union had argued that paragraph 16 and 17 of the Third Schedule of the Act is unconstitutional and inconsistent with said articles of the constitution, for being vague and threatening their rights to a speedy disciplinary proceedings with time specifications. It was specifically pleaded that the rules in the said paragraphs fail to set out the limited circumstances under which the Chief Justice can exercise his delegated power. Therefore, they said, the rules constitute an open cheque for the Chief Justice to exercise this role to the detriment of the judges and magistrates in complete violation of their rights and fundamental freedoms. “The provisions fail to set out the circumstances under which interdiction or suspension may be exercised and the validity period for interdiction for affected judicial officers,” said the union. In its view, the union said the powers to interdict and suspend a judicial officer ought to lie with the JSC and any delegation of such powers ought to vest in an independent commission and not to the office of Chief Justice. However, justice Onyango agreed with the union that indefinite suspension and unrestricted periods of interdiction of judges and magistrates amount to a violation of the constitution. “It is recommended that this is addressed administratively by the respondent by providing for the duration of any suspension or interdiction, and for extension thereof with reasons on a case by case basis,” said justice Onyango. Further she concurred with the union that the Judicial Service Commission (JSC) is the only body anticipated in the constitution to discipline and deal with complaints concerning registrars, magistrates, other judicial officers and other staff of the Judiciary. In his response to the petition, the Chief Justice through Chief Registrar Ann Amadi said interdiction and suspension are not final in nature but are interlocutory safeguards to the disciplinary process from interference by the said officer to ensure sanctity of the process. “The disciplinary process under the Judicial Service Act meets the threshold of a fair administrative action and a fair hearing as envisaged under Article 47 of the Constitution and Section 4(3) of the Fair Administrative Actions Act,” said Ms Amadi. She said that on suspension, judicial officers do not earn a salary but an Alimentary allowance. Ms Amadi described the petition as speculative saying the union failed to point out specific instances where the Chief Justice had abused his delegated power to suspend or interdict. She nonetheless confirmed that in instances where officers feel aggrieved with the exercise of such powers by the CJ they have a right of appeal, review and to approach courts, which right has always been exercised.