There is hope for a consensus in the Senate on the controversial third criteria of sharing revenue as lawmakers have agreed to take a step to help end the stalemate. In discussions that went late into Monday night, senators resolved to establish a 12-member committee to look into a matter that has gripped the house for the last two months. The committee, with Bungoma Senator Moses Wetang’ula and Nairobi's Johnson Sakaja as co-conveners, will explore all channels and prepare a report to be submitted to a Speaker’s kamukunji, an informal meeting of the legislators which is always chaired by the Speaker. The hope came on a day of high drama, anger and emotions after three senators were arrested in what was a scheme to stop them from participating in the crucial process. Deputy Minority Whip Cleophas Malala (Kakamega), Christopher Langat (Bomet) and Stephen Lelegwe (Samburu) had dramatic encounters with police for the better part of the day, but the plot backfired as it led their colleagues to do what they had failed to for weeks – unite. The lawmakers finally realised that the house is polarised. “This committee has no colour and does not belong to any side,” minority leader James Orengo said, announcing to the House that there was hope for consensus. The committee was ordered to hold its first meeting on Tuesday to develop its work plan. Clerk Jeremiah Nyegenye will head the secretariat with the Parliamentary Budget Office providing technical support. The committee will decide the stakeholders to consult, including the Commission on Revenue Allocation (CRA). “I hope that with this arrangement, we can make progress and have consensus,” Said Mr Orengo, who is Siaya County’s senator. Majority leader Samuel Poghisio (West Pokot) supported the idea but warned that the next sitting should only be agreed upon after the committee makes progress. “We have to do everything possible and support the committee,” he said, reminding the House that a similar initiative by Speaker Kenneth Lusaka was rejected by lawmakers who accused him of partisanship. The deal was hammered after Senator Sakaja sought the Speaker’s permission to adjourn for 15 minutes to try to develop an agreement, saying leaders could persuade each other to end the stalemate. “Hope is good breakfast and bad supper. Where we have reached on this matter, we can agree,” he said, and received support from both sides of the house. The Speaker thanked the lawmakers for the deal and urged them to remain united if they have to agree on a formula that will retain the stature of the House. “Let’s remain united because divided we shall fall,” he said, on a day that some lawmakers appeared to cast aspersions on his ability to lead. The other members of the committee are Stewart Madzayo, Kipchumba Murkomen, Mutula Kilonzo Jr, Susan Kihika, Samson Cherargei, Moses Kajwang, John Kinyua, Ledama ole Kina and Anue Loitiptip. The formula developed by the Committee of Finance, as stated in its report to the house, has already been amended by the proposals by Mr Sakaja and Mr Linturi. Debate on nominated Senator Petronilla Were’s motion was set to continue with the government-leaning side finally realising it had no numbers to use to push its interest. The senator proposed that the status quo remain and the CRA formula kick in when the equitable shareable revenue is raised to Sh348 billion.