Vincent Landa, a handicap 11 golfer, beat off a strong challenge from the firing Isaac Makokha, and former Kenya Golf Union chairman Muchau Githiaka, to claim the hotly contested July Monthly Mug at the par 72 Vet Lab Sports Club course over the weekend. This was despite double-bogeying the third and ninth holes, in addition to five single bogeys elsewhere. But thanks also to four birdies over the eighth, 10th, 13th and 14th which saw him finish on five over par 77 gross for nett 66. He claimed the “A” division title with two shots to spare from Kenya’s top most deaf-and-dumb golfer Isaac Makokha. Currently playing off handicap one, Makokha, was firing hot, burying four birdies at the front nine and later on at the 13th. Then came the first bogey of the day at the ninth. However, it was his bogey at the closing 18th green which denied him a possible victory, with his three under par 69 gross for nett 68 earning him the runner up prize. The handicap six Githiaka on the other hand, made four birdies, two in each nine but against three single bogeys and two awful doubles at the 11th and 17th for three over par 75 and a nett 69, to finish in third place.  Tough outing It was a tough outing for David Evans a winner of the last two mugs as he managed only one birdie and total of 13 pars, but with an triple bogey eight at the par five-seventh for five par 77 which left him in fourth place with nett 71. In the second division (B), Francis Musila, playing off handicap 20, beat Dhruv Kavia on countback with nett 68, to clinch the top prize with S. Kagwe in third place on nett 70. In the third division(C), Khush Thakkar was in a class of his own as he fired an excellent nett 65 to win by three shots from Ishan Samani, while Kennedy Ondieki was third on nett 69. Played along the July Mug, was the ladies Medal Number four where veteran lady golfer Mary Karano carded nett 73 to win the Silver Division title by a shot from tournament favourite Mercy Nyanchama. Leading junior golfers Channelle Wangari clinched the gross title with a score of 83 gross, playing off handicap seven, as Jane Wokabi on 74 nett won the Bronze, beating Rose Catherine by three shots. Lady captain Grace Wanjohi won the gross title in the Bronze division with 99, while winning the subsidiary was Onesmus Kibuna on nett 86. A total of 167 players participated in the event sponsored by the Captains kitty. At Ruiru Sports Club, Patrick Wainaina combined 34 and 31 for nett 65 to win the May Monthly Mug by a shot from Josphat Mbugua who claimed the runner up prize. Finishing in third place was Vincent Gaitho with a score of 69 nett. Tournament favourite Chris Andrea birdied four holes and dropped an equal number of shots, though it was the seven at the par three- 15th hole which completely destroyed his winning chances as he again ended with the gross title with a score of four over par 76. In the ladies section, Tabitha Kiragu fired nett 69 to win ahead of Catherine Kamene on 73 nett, while Jane Mwaura was third on nett 74. A number of guests participated in the event where Samuel Ndungi on nett 71 emerged the winner with Joseph Wambugu and Kamau Kimenju winning the nines on 32 and 31 nett.