Sports enthusiasts in Homa County can now breathe a sigh of relief as the region’s main sports facility Homa Bay Stadium, whose construction started six years ago, nicely takes shape. The 9,000-seating capacity, ultra-modern stadium is scheduled to be complete in January.National Environmental Management Authority (Nema) stopped the construction at the site last January after the county government failed to comply with construction regulations but the matter was solved in June last year and work resumed. Terraces on one of the envisaged wings of the Homa Bay Stadium take shape in this photo taken on August 11, 2020. George Odiwuor | Nation Media Group By September last year, only a fence, a foundation for the main pavilion and a levelled playing ground would be seen on a parcel of land measuring about four acres. A sport check by Nation Sport at the site Tuesday established that the construction company tasked with upgrading works, Six Eleven Construction, had carried out major works and the main pavilion was nearing completion. Work done so far includes site clearance, levelling of the playing surface wand erecting a perimeter wall. The main pavilion that has a capacity to host 3,000 people is 70 per cent complete.The project will cost Sh369 million. The company’s assistant site manager Abdihakim Mukutar said the pavilion should be ready by the end of this month after which they will embark on the playing surface and the running track. “We have built more than 75 per cent of the terraces at the pavilion which will host the VIP, s and the VVIP’s. What is left will be completed in the next two or three weeks,” said Mr Mukutar. He further noted that the county government had paid part of the money and that is why they were racing against time to finish the work within the shortest time possible. Construction on the playing surface and the running track are set to begin in October  Once complete, the facility will have two wings — north and south. Each wing will have a 2,000 capacity stand alongside a VIP pavilion with a capacity of 3,000, terrace with seating capacity of 2,000 people.  The playing surface and the running track will be artificial. Other features are an eight lane tartan track, modern changing rooms and underground offices. The county executive for sports Fredrick Odero said that he was impressed with the work that had been done so far. “The contractor concentrated on the main pavilion but he has since done a commendable job. Once complete, this stadium will host national celebrations and major national exhibitions” said the executive. Officials from the national government in the ministry of sports are expected to inspect the facility next week to assess its progress. “I am optimistic that the project will be completed by December or early January,” said Odero. “This stadium has been approved by different government institutions including the department of civil works. “We have made an agreement with the contractor that whenever he finishes a section, my department pays him without delay.  “We use funds from the county treasury that were budgeted to be used in this project,” he added. Kenyan Premier League champions Gor Mahia can trace their origins to Homa Bay. They may have considered using the region to play their league home matches but lack of a suitable playing ground sees them using Moi Stadium in Kisumu instead. No sports facility in the region has been approved by Football Kenya Federation (FKF) to host major games in the country.