Turkana Governor Josphat Nanok has raised the alarm over community transmission of the coronavirus after confirming that a security guard at his residence and some senior county officials have tested positive for it. Mr Nanok said samples were collected from his wife, a child, cooks and security guards after the health department rolled out mass testing. Speaking in Lokichar on Saturday, during the burial of Assistant Chief Livingston Erupe, the governor said the test results were forwarded to him as he flew to Eldoret, Uasin Gishu County. "The coronavirus visited my home but was swiftly identified while still at the gate. I travelled immediately from Eldoret to Lodwar by road to order a Covid-19 test for all, including senior officers in my administration,” he said. “It was confirmed that some of my senior officers also tested positive." He said he decided to make the news public because public officers interact with many people seeking services. The governor asked residents to adhere to all Ministry of Health guidelines for containing the pandemic, especially face masks while in public. He regretted that the youth were not taking the guidelines seriously and risked spreading the virus to many people. "If I were still a youth, I wouldn't be attracted to a partner without a face mask because that would automatically endanger my life. Let's all play our roles in curbing the spread of the disease." Regarding Turkana’s statistics, the governor said 31 patients were under treatment at isolation centers in Kakuma and Lodwar towns. Community transmission of Covid-19 has seen county departments and the assembly step up awareness creation and donation of hand-washing equipment, sanitisers, soap and face masks to high risk groups. Livestock and fish traders in Lodwar town, who interact with customers from major towns including Nairobi, Kisumu and Busia as well as the Democratic Republic of Congo, recently received 3, 200 free reusable face masks. The donation from the government and the United States Agency for International Development (USAID) also included hand-washing equipment. Trade executive Esther Lokwei said Turkana was also restructuring markets in all the seven sub-counties to ensure adequate space for social distancing. Speaker Ekitela Lokaale donated 100 hand-washing machines, sanitisers, soap and masks to all public offices in Lodwar to ensure they are compliant with the Health ministry’s protocols. Mr Nanok attended the burial with MPs James Lomenen (Turkana South), John Lodepe (Turkana Central), Joyce Emanikor (Woman Representative), Mohammed Ali Lokiru (Turkana East) and Jeremiah Lomorukai (Loima). Mr Lomenen said he had stepped up distribution of masks, sanitisers and soap to all churches in his constituency.