The government has begun the rehabilitation of the old railway line from Nakuru to Kisumu which has remained neglected for nearly 25 years. The project, which will cost Sh3.7 billion, is being handled by the Kenya Defense Force in partnership with the Kenya Railways Corporation. The rehabilitation of the Nakuru-Kisumu line is expected to take eight months. Speaking during the tour of the ongoing works in Nakuru, Defense Chief Administrative Secretary Mr Peter Odoyo said the project will take a maximum of eight months to complete The CAS revealed that the revamping of the meter-gauge railway, which had been neglected for over two decades, followed a presidential directive aimed at stimulating the economy along the rail route. “We want to ensure that businesses that depended on this railway line come back to life. Our main work here will involve geometry and drainage correction, track renewal, ballasting, bridge and viaduct repairs, culverts construction and rehabilitation of the old station buildings among other jobs,” said Mr Odoyo. Personnel from the National Youth Service will help clear bushes along the rail way line, officials said. The military will manage the project while the Kenya Railways will provide the required materials. The National Youth Service will undertake the clearing of bushes along the 217 kilometre line and do other manual jobs. According to Mr Odoyo, the government embarked on the rehabilitation of the railway line to be a supporting infrastructure for the newly constructed Kisumu port. He noted that the Sh3 billion port risks remaining a white elephant project should the route remain unattended. Kenya Railways Rift Valley regional civil engineer Veronica Ngugi said the railway line once complete will offer both cargo and passenger travel services. Abandoned Kenya Railways offices in Elburgon, Nakuru County. Kenya Railways said it will reclaim all the lands that had been leased to private individuals. Mr Patrick Nzomo, the Kenya Railways estate manager, said there was an agreement between the railways and the tenants that the leased land would be reclaimed when need arose. “The land is now needed for the purposes of rehabilitation of the railway and have begun reclaiming it. We have also ordered those undertaking cultivation to stop immediately and surrender the land to us,” said Mr Nzomo. jopenda@ke.nationmedia.com