The Naivas Supermarket chain has opened its 65th store in Kisumu County as it seeks to enhance its presence in the lakeside city. Naivas, one of the largest retailers in the country, took over the space that collapsed retail giant Nakumatt occupied, having closed shop under the weight of debt. The new branch along the busy Kisumu-Nairobi highway sits on 24,000 square feet of space at the Mega City Mall. Speaking during the official launch on Saturday, Naivas Chief Commercial Officer Willy Kimani said the move followed the success of its initial branch that was set up in the county 2014. “We have brought the food market concept to Kisumu in line with our strategic mission to extend the modern design series across all major urban centers,” said Mr Kimani. The retailer has embarked on a massive expansion of its branch network following the sale of a 30 per cent stake to France-based private equity fund Amethis Finance for Sh1.5 billion. The new branch opened as the retailer celebrated its 30th anniversary, reflecting on progress made since its birth in Naivasha three decades years ago. Mr Kimani explained that Naivas’ expansion in Kisumu is a reflection of the firm’s belief in the economic future of the county and its neighbours. “We expect to serve Kisumu and the larger peripheral centers including Awasi, Ahero, Maseno and even Vihiga and Siaya counties,” he said. The retail chain is hoping to tap into infrastructural developments in the entire lake region including the port and the railway. The new Mega City branch has employed 120 staff redeployed from other branches as part of the overall strategic plan to retain employees despite challenges wrought by the Covid-19 pandemic. The Naivas boss also noted that the enterprise has put together a compliance team to ensure adherence to Covid-19 prevention measures across its network and among suppliers. He noted that Naivas is a keen supporter of local economies and indigenous small and medium-size firms. "In this regard, the firm ensures that all suppliers are paid within the stipulated contract terms and that their products consistently meet the quality and reliability threshold set by both parties. This is done to protect customers’ expectations and the Naivas brand reputation," he said. Mr Kimani also explained that besides the pricing factor, quality and consistently in supply determine the number of customer visits to a store. “Once we establish a product at a particular outlet, it is important to ensure it is always available in the right quality,” he said. He said the retailer works with suppliers to develop and refine their business plans and align them with Naivas’. In this way, he stated, the retailer helps the entrepreneurs manage their production and supply chain mechanics in a sustainable manner.