Residents of Mandera County were all smiles after they received free face masks and hand sanitisers from a local non-governmental organisation to help in the fight against the coronavirus. Speaking while flagging off the consignment to Mandera North, Banisa and Mandera West sub-counties, Danish Refugee Council (DRC) Area Manager Abdi Mohamed Abdi called on residents to adhere to the set health protocols. “We are dedicated in supporting the most vulnerable members of society during this pandemic by donating face masks and hand sanitisers, among other facilities, to cushion them against Covid-19 effects,” said Mr Abdi. He said they are aiming at reducing the spread of the coronavirus in Mandera County. The organisation also donated raw materials to local tailors to make masks for the residents. The donation funded by Danida is implemented by the Danish Refugee Council in Mandera. “We are giving out raw materials for making facemasks to technical institutions’ graduates specialising in tailoring across the county,” he said. County Chief Officer for Medical Services Abukar Sheikh admitted that the county is facing teething challenges in enforcing Covid-19 guidelines. “We are now faced with local transmission of the coronavirus and our society has abandoned the set health protocols leading to upsurge in cases,” he said. Mandera has now recorded a caseload of 28 with two deaths. According to Mr Sheikh, the true prevalence of the disease will be known once the local testing laboratory is up and running in the next few days. He lamented that the public in Mandera has continued to interact with the sick due to the cultural set up. “We can only win this fight by applying all prevention measures as proposed but our public are ignoring every measure and continue to handle the dead normally,” he said, acknowledging that Mandera could be having more deaths that have gone unreported. He said the donation by the Danish Refugee Council will help the poor members of society in fighting the spread of the virus. Mandera County Chief Officer for Public Health Rahama Abdullahi thanked the council for the donation, further calling on more NGOs to come on board and help the county government in combating Covid-19. “We are in dire need of support in this fight because the infection is on the raise since lifting of the lockdown. I am requesting more donors to come and support all our sub-counties,” she said.