When the government issued a directive that all Kenyans should wear face masks to stop the spread of the Covid-19, many vulnerable residents of Kwa Rhonda and Kaptembwa slums suffered since they could not afford the protective gear. The elderly, people living with disabilities, and hundreds of residents who lost their livelihoods saw their movements curtailed. And when the police raided the area, those who were found not to be observing the social distancing guidelines and Ministry of Health guidelines were arrested. But the vulnerable residents need not worry anymore as Midrift Human Rights Network (HURINET) in conjunction with the Danish Emergency Relief Fund (DERF) has come to their aid. “Midrift Hurinet in conjunction with Danish Emergency Relief Fund is reaching out to the vulnerable in the community in the slums of Kwa Rhonda, Kaptembwa, Bondeni and Karagita in Naivasha where at least 200 poor residents will receive a care package that would enable them to cope with Covid-19 pandemic," said Midrift Executive Director Joseph Omondi. On Wednesday, the slum dwellers received food vouchers worth Sh1,500 per household. The residents will receive assistance to maintain good hygiene and also, the food vouchers will be given twice a month for the next six months. Mr Joshua Ambalwa could not hide his joy after receiving the food voucher and sanitisers and thanked Midrift Hurinet and Danish donors for their gesture. “I am a disabled person and this voucher and sanitiser is a great relief as I have no steady source of income due to my sick ness as I move with walking aid,” said Mr Ambalwa According to Mr Omondi, beneficiaries also received the protective gear, face masks, and hand sanitisers. The donation also included seven 1,000 litres water tanks and liquid handwash soaps to be distributed to the affected communities. “The objective of Midrift and Danish Emergency relief Fund is to mitigate against the pandemic by creating access to water, sanitation, and hygiene," said Mr Omondi The move will lead to improving sanitation and hygiene practices among vulnerable persons in the informal settlements in Nakuru County. “The campaign will also increase the understanding of prevention and increase knowledge of the need to test for Covid-19,” said Mr Omondi fmureithi@ke.nationmedia.com