Nairobi Metropolitan Services (NMS) has started upgrading Mama Lucy Kibaki Hospital to a county referral facility as part of a strategy to improve service delivery. NMS Director-General Mohamed Badi said the elevation to a level five hospital will see the number of beds increased to 120. Mama Lucy will also have an 18-bed Intensive Care Unit (ICU) for use in the fight against Covid-19. So far, the facility has received personal protective equipment (PPEs) donated by Equity Bank for use by its health workers for up to 15 months. The upgrade of the hospital, the biggest one in Eastlands, began in 2017 and has seen a 60-bed wing constructed. Mr Badi said the project is part of a plan to ensure health services are easily accessible to the people. “Ours it to reach out to the people where they are. We are upgrading every hospital and building new facilities in Nairobi, starting with 24 hospitals in informal settlements," he said. A level five hospital is what is known as a county referral hospital and is run by chief executive officers who are doctors by profession. It has at least 100 beds and can handle more than 250 patients every day. Mama Lucy Hospital is currently a level four hospital located in Embakasi West. It is the main referral hospital for Nairobi’s Eastlands area and also serves patients from Kiambu, Thika and Kangundo. Mama Lucy offers general outpatient services, accident and emergency services, tuberculosis treatment and pharmaceutical services. After the upgrade the facility will be able to offer medical laboratory diagnosis, major and minor surgeries, oxygen supply services among others. The hospital’s construction was financed using a donation from the Chinese government, with a sum of Sh540 million spent on medical equipment and infrastructure. It currently has 112 beds and serves 13,220 patients every month.  Superintendent Musa Mohammed said it has 440 staff, including 21 consultants, 10 medical officers, six dentists, 15 pharmacists, 193 nurses and non–clinical staff. To operate optimally, it will need 752 health personnel. The hospital lacks facilities including a physical rehabilitation unit, trauma unit, burns unit, staff quarters, an ICU, administration block and a psychiatry unit.