Wicked plan • With President Uhuru Kenyatta pursuing his own political interests, Joseph Macharia is almost certain he will endorse the unpopular bill to award MPs who have served since 1984 a Sh100,000 monthly pension. But he wishes somebody will go to court to “stop the evil scheme to milk taxpayers”. and hopes the judge “will see the sense and stop the wicked plan”. His contact is machariajoseph82@gmail.com. *** Mystery number • During Huduma Namba registration, Thomas Yebei recalls, there were long slow queues all day amid threats of prosecution and denial of government services if one didn’t sign up. Three years later, he laments, nobody in government says anything about this magical number. “Can Interior PS Karanja Kibicho tell us what became of it?” His contact is tomyebei@yahoo.com. *** Unreachable • With increased focus on Covid-19 testing, Lancet Kenya, which offers diagnostic services, must be receiving lots of inquiries., says Rod Barto, but he can’t access the company via email. “Could somebody explain why when I send an email to info@lancet.co.ke I receive delivery failures from seven people, on five days, saying their mailboxes are full?” His contact is rrbarton2001@yahoo.com. *** Access denied • For over a month, overseas-based Florence Makeba Ochieng cannot reach KRA to get her PIN online. “The KRA website is always down, phone calls are hardly answered and, when the officials do, they are arrogant. Emails are not responded to. I sent my nephew to the Times Towers headquarters in Nairobi and he also did not get any assistance.” Her contact is fochieng2002@yahoo.com. *** Courting danger • Nairobi lawyer Ahmednassir Abdullahi aka The Grand Mullah, Henry Lisege notes, was recently awarded by a court a whopping Sh700,000 for the damaged windscreen of his luxury Bentley Bentayga in a suit against KeNHA. “That means he did not insure his car and this would be an offence,” wonders Henry, whose contact is okuroaruji@gmail.com. Have a rightful day, won’t you!