Two senior Isiolo County finance officers will remain in police custody until Friday morning when a court will rule on an application by a group of contractors to have them committed to civil jail for failure to pay Sh83 million in pending bills. Finance Executive Abdinassir Hajj Daud and Chief Officer Peter Ngechu were arraigned for reportedly breaching a consent order entered into between the county government and the contractors at a local court in August 2019. The agreement required that Sh80 million be paid by December 15, 2109 and the remaining Sh83 million by September 15, 2020. Through their lawyer Ken Muriuki, the five contractors, hired by the former county government, lamented that the Governor Mohamed Kuti’s administration has failed to commit itself to abiding by the consent, arguing that payment started in March this year instead of December as earlier agreed. “We pray that the two officials be committed to civil jail as way to coerce the county government to pay the pending bills,” the lawyer said. The county’s failure to clear the bills has seen the accrued interest shoot to millions of shillings, with the contractors demanding at least Sh4 million more. The money is owed for services including supply of foodstuffs (maize, beans, sugar, cooking oil and rice), hiring of transport and security services for administrative functions and provision of construction services during the previous regime. When they appeared before Isiolo Chief Magistrate Samuel Mungai on Thursday, their counsel, Kiogora Mugambi, sought their release assuring the court that the county government will pay the bills in 25 days. “My clients have complied with the consent order by paying some of the money though there has been some delays. The county government has committed to clear the remaining Sh83 million by September 15, 2020,” said Mr Mugambi. The Magistrate directed that the two county officials be detained at Isiolo Police Station until Friday when ruling on application to have them jailed will be made. “The court will peruse through the records, consider the application and give a ruling on whether the respondents will be committed to civil jail or not at 8.15am tomorrow (Friday),” Magistrate Mungai said. The arrest of the officials comes six months after the Isiolo court ordered they be apprehended and committal to civil jail together with County Secretary Ahmed Galgalo until the debt is paid. In previous court submissions, the county government said the delay was occasioned by differences in figures from the Auditor-General’s office and county taskforce reports. The county was to reconcile the figures before starting to make payments. Governor Kuti had previously promised to clear Sh617 million bills by June to pave way for completion of ongoing mega projects including the Isiolo town modern market, stadium and county headquarters. The county boss then lamented that the debts, mostly inherited from his predecessor, had delayed completion of projects and made his government look like it was underperforming. The recently passed Sh510 supplementary budget was to facilitate payment of all the genuine debts owed to contractors and suppliers.