Hundreds of youths engaged in the government’s Kazi Mtaani programme in Isiolo have threatened to boycott work over non-payment of their wages and lack of protective gear. The recruits say the current working conditions could expose them to the dreaded Covid-19. The irate youths held protests decrying what they said was unfairness in payment, noting that a big number of those who participated in the first phase had not been paid while some of those who participated in the second phase are receiving their pay in bits, contrary to the agreement. The youths, who are involved in street clean-ups, fumigation and disinfection, garbage collection, bush clearing and drainage unclogging said they are yet to be provided with tools of work despite the same having been released some weeks ago. Addressing journalists in Isiolo town, they lamented that delayed payments had exposed them to a lot of suffering as they cannot fend for themselves and their families that are reeling from the harsh economic effects of the coronavirus. Ms Frida Muthoni, who is among those not yet paid, said the situation could make youths go back to drugs and alcohol abuse due to desperation. “We are wondering what criterion is being used because some of us have gotten some cash while a big number of us have not,” said Ms Muthoni, adding that they were to receive their pay after 11 days according to the initial agreement. The youths are part of the 3,479 cohorts recruited recently from 20 informal settlements in the county and are supposed to be paid Sh455 daily for days worked. An activist, Mr Ismael Galma, appealed to the county director of housing to expedite processing of the youths’ dues, expressing fears that the current desperate situation could lead them into evil activities. “We are appealing to President Uhuru Kenyatta to intervene and help us out. We are suffering because most of us lost jobs due to the coronavirus,” said Ms Saadia Ali. Contacted, Isiolo County Commissioner Herman Shambi noted that those yet to be paid provided wrong details, mostly phone numbers not registered using their ID numbers. He said that the complaints by the Kazi Mtaani recruits are being acted on. “We are sorting the issue and they will get their pay. The delay is due to mismatch in the information they provided but this has already been rectified,” said Mr Shambi. On provision of safety gear, the administrator said though the county government offered to give them some of the tools, the youths were to come with their own. He said the first tranche of the county’s provision was not enough but they are expecting more. “We recently issued them with masks and they were supposed to come with the safety gear and tools according to the agreement,” he noted.