Seven people have perished while several others have been left with severe injuries and broken limbs following a grisly road crash at the Kaburengu junction in Kakamega County along the Eldoret-Malaba highway. The Monday afternoon incident happened after a truck which was heading to Webuye from Eldoret lost its breaks and hit a matatu before crashing into people who were on the roadside. The seven include women who were selling vegetables and other foodstuffs along the road. The accident caused a huge traffic snarl-up along the busy highway. A health worker attends to a man who was injured in the road crash. The driver of the truck which was carrying ballast survived after he jumped out of the moving vehicle. Police from Webuye and Matete police stations rushed to the scene took the bodies to Webuye County Hospital mortuary. The injured were taken to the Webuye County Hospital for treatment. Residents have protested over rising road crashes in the area which is said to be a black spot. Ms Anne Malikia, who sells onions and tomatoes, said that they saw the lorry coming from Eldoret direction approaching at high speed and they took to their heels. But some of the people on the roadside were not lucky. "Those who have died are mama mbogas whom we work with here daily and touts while several bodaboda riders have also been injured," she said. The matatu which was hit by the speeding truck. Ms Malkia appealed to the Kakamega County government to relocate the market to another place before more lives are lost. "We are paying revenue to the county daily yet we are endangering our lives here where we sell our products. We are appealing to Governor Wycliffe Oparanya to relocate us from this place and build us a market somewhere safe," she said. Kakamega Deputy County Police Commander James Ngetich said that the driver of the ill-fated vehicle lost control after its brakes failed before it began hitting those who were on the roadside. He said that 14 people were rushed to hospital in critical condition. Those who died were three women who were selling foodstuffs, two children and two touts. The police boss urged motorists plying the northern corridor highway to be careful and vigilant while approaching Kaburengu which is notorious accident spot. About 100 meters from the scene, two trucks collided but no one was injured.