The recent debate on the allocation of revenue elicited mixed reactions, offering a glimpse into challenges and opportunities in the counties that, for decades, have been classified as either underdeveloped or “non-starters”. That they are fighting to have their funding increased indicates that many of them are struggling to undertake transformation. Unfortunately for the arid and semi-arid land counties, the revenue is not the only struggle but rather lack of transformational leadership, continued conflicts, many cultural practices and associations that have made it impossible for them to prosper. Since Independence, there has been negative association with many of these counties which range between tribal clashes, banditry and divisive politics often based on clannism. For decades the regions were marginalised, viewed as unproductive with negative media publicity. Of the 47 devolved governments, Asal comprise 29 counties, making it difficult to ignore them in national conversations. Leaders have in the past promised to unlock the potential that these regions hold for its citizens. In pursuit of an inclusive economy and shared prosperity, we must not leave ASAL regions behind. But to make them prosperous, let us focus on prudent use of resources, including the revenue allocated by the national government and other donors. While most of the area consists of arid lands, where rainfall is low, temperatures are high throughout the year, and where people’s access to and control over critical livelihood resources such as land is insecure, the local leadership must concentrate its annual plan to uplift the region. There seemed a clear correlation between scarcity of natural resources resulting from the drought and violent conflict in the ASAls. But with good leadership and right people at its helm, societies have the ability to overcome myriad challenges and pastoralist are not an exception. Sadly, while some communities have made strides in overcoming issues regarding natural resources, there has been politicisation of conflicts and conflicting policies in seeking to make the North an oasis of peace and prosperity. This has made it almost impossible for counties to raise standard revenue and often. Some of the conflicts pit governors against the county assembly and this adversely affects operations. We need to get mechanism to resolve these issues to properly utilise the revenue for social transformation. There is a need to elect leaders of integrity and good morals to accelerate the huge promise that ASALs hold for national development. We can’t just sit back and wait for national revenue share. Saruni Lemargeroi, political/governance analyst and Mandela Washington fellow. lemargeroi@gmail.com.