Former Makadara MP Benson Mutura has won the Nairobi Speaker election after receiving 99 out of 122 votes in the first round. His was a unanimous victory after a first-of-a-kind vote Zoom vote on Friday due to measures taken to prevent the spread of Covid-19. Mr Mutura defeated five other candidates, who did not get any votes, in the race to succeed Ms Beatrice Elachi, who resigned on Tuesday after close to three years in office. He received all the votes cast and, in the process, was declared the new Speaker in the first round after surpassing the 81 votes threshold. In his announcement of the winner, acting Speaker John Kamangu said, "I hereby declare Mr Benson Mutura the new Nairobi County Assembly Speaker, having attained more than the required two-thirds majority votes." Six candidates from the seven earlier shortlisted battled it out for the chance to lead city MCAs in the assembly. This was after former Speaker Alex ole Magelo withdrew from the race to support Mr Mutura, a Jubilee Party candidate. Others candidates were former Nairobi Deputy Speaker Ken Ngondi, former Nairobi Economic Planning chief officer Dr Washington Makodingo, Abdi Ali Abdi who came second to Ms Elachi in the 2017 Speaker election, Mike Obonyo Guoro and Allan Chacha Mang’era. The new Speaker thanked President Uhuru Kenyatta, Jubilee and the Opposition for having faith in him and promised to be a servant for all and embrace divergent views. Mr Mutura pledged to put party affiliations aside and herald a new assembly where all MCAs are treated equally. He said he is ready to work with all the ward representatives to ensure Nairobi residents get much-needed services. “I cannot say I was the best. It is you who saw it fit to elect me. We will work together regardless of party affiliations,” he told the MCAs after taking the oath of office. The 48-year-old father of three described himself as a non-partisan Speaker, who will maintain fidelity to the rule of law. He called on the MCAs to walk with him in the journey to reclaim the tainted image of the assembly, which has been embroiled in constant chaos. He also asked the assembly to work with the executive and the Nairobi Metropolitan Services (NMS) to ensure Nairobi residents get the services they expect from the county government. “The NMS is like a newborn baby so we must take care of the office as instructed by the President.” Mr Mutura adjourned the sittings to September 8 after taking over from Mr Kamangu, who is also the Deputy Speaker. Mr Kamangu promised the assembly will see no wrangles and chaos again and will remain united going forward. Mr Mutura was born on September 7, 1972 in Kiambu and rose from a councilor in Nairobi to become Makadara MP between 2013 and 2017. He was defeated by current MP George Aladwa in the 2017 General Election. He attended Dagoretti High School between 1986 and 1990 before joining Graffin College, where he earned a certificate in Computer Service later joining Kenya Polytechnic, now Technical University of Kenya, to pursue a diploma in Procurement and Supplies between 1993 and 1995. In 2006, he joined Jomo Kenyatta University of Agriculture and Technology to study Bachelor of Science in Governance and Leadership graduating in 2010. He also holds a Bachelor of Business Commerce degree (Second Class Upper Division) from the Kenya Methodist University. Meanwhile, a civil society group called Nairobi Residents has threatened to go to court to challenge Mr Mutura’s election, saying it was not transparent. The group led by Alfayo Agufana said the advert stated that the vote would take place at City Hall chambers, not virtually. “The advert called for people to apply within 48 hours before the elections, thereby giving only hours for applications for the job and in the process locking out some people,” he said.