The Jubilee Party has summoned all its MCAs at the Nairobi County Assembly for an urgent consultative meeting this afternoon (Thursday). This comes ahead of election of a new County Assembly Speaker slated for Friday afternoon following the resignation of Beatrice Elachi on Tuesday. The meeting, which will be held at the ruling party's headquarters, has been called by Jubilee Secretary General Raphael Tuju. "In light of the current developments at the Nairobi County Assembly, you are required to attend a consultative meeting of all Jubilee elected and nominated at Jubilee Headquarters in Pangani at 12 noon on Thursday, August 13, 2020 without fail," said Mr Tuju in the letter. "The Jubilee Party Whip at the Assembly Mr Paul Kados is by copy of this letter expected to whip members accordingly," he added. The ruling party has a total of 65 MCAs, both elected and nominated, after nominated MCA Habiba Hussein lost her seat over missing sittings for two years. The meeting will coincide with a disciplinary hearing for eight MCAs summoned on Tuesday that will take place in the morning. They were summoned by the President Uhuru Kenyatta-led party to appear before its disciplinary committee on Thursday over misconduct. They include acting Speaker and Ruai MCA John Kamangu Nyumu, Ziwani/Kariokor MCA Millicent Mugadi, Kayole Central MCA Jeremiah Karani, Dandora Area 3 MCA Charles Thuo Wakarindi and nominated MCAs June Ndegwa, Joyce Kamau, Susan Makungu and Margaret Mbote. In the summonses signed by party chair Nelson Dzuya and copied to Secretary-General Raphael Tuju, the MCAs are accused of “various infractions in their conduct that contravene the standards of discipline as per the party Constitution”. Interestingly, the summoned MCAs are all allied to Ms Elachi. “This letter is to inform you that you are required to appear before the disciplinary committee on August 13, 2020 at 10 am at the party headquarters,” the letter states, adding that those summoned acted contrary to pledges made and signed in 2017. “The committee shall grant you an audience on this date to hear your side of the story. A decision may then be made whether to prefer formal charges or not against you." The meeting comes amid chaos and supremacy battles at the Nairobi Assembly that have pitted reinstated majority leader Abdi Guyo and the former Speaker. This is after Ms Elachi declined to communicate changes made by the party at the Assembly in April. It also follows fracas last month that saw Mlango Kubwa MCA Patricia Mutheu assaulted by police when MCAs attempted to serve Ms Elachi with an impeachment motion against her.