Former Machakos Senator Johnson Muthama has dismissed a claim by Wiper party leader Kalonzo Musyoka that he misled him to pursue a destructive political path in the past two general elections. Mr Muthama said Mr Musyoka's claim was an admission that he is a political weakling who is incapable of making independent decisions. He was speaking on Saturday in Mbilini village, Kangundo in Machakos County during the burial of Henry Masaku, son of the late former veteran politician and freedom fighter Paul Ngei. Mr Musyoka had made the claims against Muthama on Friday during the burial of a son of former powerful Kanu politician Mulu Mutisya in Muthetheni, Mwala Constituency. "Somebody tell Kalonzo that were it not for me, he wouldn't have been a vice president. I personally negotiated for his position with retired President Mwai Kibaki," said Mr Muthama. The former senator was flanked by MPs Victor Munyaka (Machakos Town), Fabian Kyule (Kangundo) and Vincent Musyoka (Mwala) together with whom he has launched a fierce campaign for Deputy President William Ruto's 2022 presidential bid. On his part, Nairobi Governor Mike Sonko warned that such divisive politics could deny the Kamba community the opportunity to win the presidency come 2022. "I urge our leaders to find a common ground and agree to pursue a common path. We cannot all be president. It is our organisation as a community that will either make or break our political destiny," said Sonko. Sonko urged Ukambani leaders to unite, work together and end attacks on each other, saying that the wrangles are likely to divide people in the region. "I urge all leaders in the region to put aside their differences and unite for the region to move on and solve pertinent issues affecting the residents including poverty, lack of water, healthcare and education instead of unnecessary competition,'' Sonko added. Mr Kyule said the Kamba community has been making wrong choices during past presidential elections, adding that this time, he, together with other like-minded leaders will ensure the community is represented in the next government. "I am asking all leaders in Ukambani to put their political differences aside and concentrate on the development agenda to improve the lives of locals instead of engaging in divisive politics,'' he said, adding that this not the time for politicking. He also urged the government to assist the families of former freedom fighters. Mr Munyaka called on the youth across the country to remain vigilant and fight for elective positions in 2022 in order to change the way the country is governed. He also urged residents in Ukambani to be vigilant while vetting potential occupants of elective position s ahead of 2022 general election. The MP said poor choice of political leaders was responsible for high levels of poverty and unemployment among Kenyans over 5O years after independence. He urged Kenyans to vote wisely in the next general election and elect leaders who have their interest of at heart. On his part, the Mwala MP called on residents of Ukambani to vote wisely in 2022, bearing in mind that their quality of life thereafter will be determined by the choice of leaders they elect. He warned that the divisions among leaders from the region threatens to cost the Kamba community the presidency come 2022. Mr Musyoka said the region should unite and listen to one leader but not be seen as a wrangling community.