Independence party Kanu has set up a presidential campaign mobilisation strategy, just two weeks after the party announced its leader Gideon Moi will be on the ballot in 2022. The party last month launched an online membership registration drive that its leaders said will be critical to what will be the 56-year-old Moi’s first stab at the top job. Since then, the Baringo senator has gone on an overdrive of meeting delegations in what is akin to the return of the allure of Kabarak — where his late father Daniel Moi hosted politicians at his palatial home and made make-or-break decisions on political careers. “We know for sure that come 2022, we are in it. This time, we are not supporting anybody. We have done it for the last several elections where we go out there and support others. This time, we will have our own,” Kanu secretary-general Nick Salat said at the party’s headquarters last month. “We do not want to just stay afloat. We want to take leadership.” The Nation has also learnt that the party is involved in a series of grassroots registration of members in various parts of the Rift Valley, as it seeks to build its support base in the region. The registration drives are ongoing in Nakuru, Baringo, Kericho, Bomet, Narok, Kajiado, and parts of North Rift, including Uasin Gishu. Online recruitment Nakuru Kanu branch organising-secretary Kimani Wa Kimani revealed to the Nation that the party has embarked on the online recruitment and campaigns to bolster its support. Kanu officials familiar with the ongoing exercise revealed to the Nation that the activities mainly target those who feel disgruntled by Deputy President William Ruto’s leadership style in the region. “We will continue ... raiding DP Ruto home turf,” said the official. The campaigns come a few weeks after Kanu unveiled a new team to boost the party’s nationwide influence. The team, chaired by Senate Majority Leader Samuel Poghisio, is making of decisions on party affairs, including articulation of policies and nationwide grassroots engagements. The team is also undertaking a re-evaluation of the party’s existing structures across the country. Other committee members are Elizabeth Kimkung (vice-chairperson), nominated Senator Abshiro Halake, and Mr Salat. Also in the committee are Joseph Towett, George Wainaina, Aluoch Joshua, Bafadhil Abdirahman, Edward Kivuvani and Job Waka. But political commentator John Koech doubts that Senator Moi will make any significant political impact in popularising Kanu and tame Dr Ruto’s surging popularity in Rift Valley. “Ruto still remains the man to beat in Rift Valley in spite of the vain efforts by his Kalenjin foes to cut him down to size. DP Ruto defied senior Moi previously and still made it to his current position,” argued Mr Koech. Reporting by Patrick Lang’at, Eric Matara, Onyango K’Onyango, Barnabas Bii