The Law Society of Kenya (LSK) is now accusing the police stoking tension that could fuel chaos ahead of the 2022 General Election. LSK President Nelson Havi warned that continued use of police officers to intimidate political leaders was a recipe for disaster if not stopped at an early stage. While pointing an accusing finger at Interior Cabinet Secretary Dr Fred Matiang’i, he accused the government of using security officers to settle political scores against those those opposed to State policies. Speaking in Mumias after seeking the release of Kakamega Senator Cleophas Malala, Mr Havi called on Dr Matiang’i to save Kenya from 'burning in the next election' through police provocation. “At issue is that the underlying logic of peace processes and elections are at odds with conciliation and compromise in the current Kenyan scenario where police officers are being used to harass, intimidate, arrest and detain those who are opposed to the government policies,” he stated after securing Malala's release. He revealed that LSK is contemplating filing a case to protect the Judiciary and Legislature, which Mr Havi says are being pushed to a corner. “As LSK, we are determined to return the rule of law in Kenya and save the Judicial and Legislative arms of the government from being manipulated by the Executive. Today, Parliament has been emasculated not to make independent decisions and the same is extending to the judiciary,” he said. He blamed ‘a few people’ for dictating what Parliament and Judiciary should do, even though they are independent institutions created by the Constitution. “Parliament has been cocooned to serve the interests of only two people. As LSK, we want to ensure that each of the three arms of government function independently and in accordance with the rule of the law,” he stated. LSK also tasked the Inspector General of Police to ensure police officers who go out to arrest suspects are in full uniform with their badges displayed to show their service numbers.