Most parts of Marsabit County are not by any means known for dense vegetative cover and deep weathering profiles. But the love for trees by one hotel owner has debunked the thinking that lush trees cannot thrive in the region. Lt Gen A.K. Mulata’s deep love for gardening has seen the creation of a breath-taking surrounding in one of the driest areas of Marsabit Central. His son, Hassan Mulata, narrated how the struggle to choose plants which would thrive on the then bare 17 acres of land eight years ago was not a walk in the park. As pioneering  gardeners of this kind,  their  biggest frustrations were getting things to grow in parts of the yard that were too dry, shady, hot and  at the same time windy. Moreover, they had no background knowledge in landscaping. The entrance of Jirime Hotel. Watering the plants until they grew big enough to sustain themselves was another herculean task due to the erratic rains in Marsabit. This forced Mr Mulata and his father to harvest water during the long rains season or to buy the commodity from vendors. The initiative was entirely dependent on exploration and determination. “Sometimes, it’s ones quest that determines their fate in any undertaking. I can tell you that today we have more rewards to reckon and pay attention to for giving it a try,” Mr Mulata said. Having lived in some tropical areas, Mr Mulata said his father decided to try having his home-grown forest cover. Little did he know that his inspiration would be an impetus for many others to borrow from many years later. Jirime is one of the most strategically positioned hotels and which is preferred by many guests and locals who plan to convene conferences as it is just about five kilometres from Marsabit town. Upon stepping into the compound, even the temperature seems to change from that of the surroundings. In 2018, officials from the National Environment Management Authority visited the hotel and gave the owner a certificate of recognition for his environment conservation efforts. Trees line up the road leading into the hotel. The mixture of 100 exotic and ingenious tree species planted within the hotel’s compound have proved the most spectacular growth, creating a favourable atmosphere which the owners boast of as being a unique attraction for many clients. The tree species such as eucalyptus, pine, grevillea robusta, Calliandra calothyrsus, Markhamia lutea and Croton macrostachyus among others are responsible for the regulated temperatures of the surroundings. Jirime Hotel’s daily occupancy ranges between 10 and 20 during normal days and more than 50 when there are conferences being held. It majorly receives its clients from the county government, civil society groups, national government agencies and wedding delegations. According to Mr Mulata, they have plans to undertake similar projects at Holale Hotel, a newly established branch in Moyale town. They have also started practicing kitchen gardening with kales, onions, tomatoes, spinach and watermelon being grown to supplement the hotel's food supplies. Additionally, they currently have a tree nursery with enough seedlings for sale. Mr Mulata challenged environmentalists to plant trees and nurture them till they are fully grown and not just for arbitrary environmental occasions. “I appeal to our people to plant more trees even in their homesteads and they will have a lot to smile about,’’ Mr Mulata said.