After finishing fourth in the July Mug on August 1, David Evans bounced back to claim the top division title during the weekend’s August Mug, which attracted a field of 170 players,  including 12 professionals at the par 72 Vet Lab Sports Club course. Playing off handicap six, Evans, cancelled two early bogeys with birdies at the fourth and seventh, picked an awful six at the par three-sixth to carry to the back nine a three over par score. He dropped two shots at the par five-12th and a single shot at the 13th hole. However, a two club at the par four-15th and another two at the par three-16th came as a big relief for Evans and contributed into his three over par 75 and a nett score of 69 to beat handicap 12 Tom Chirchir by one shot. Chirchir managed nine pars and a birdie at the 10th which translated to gross 82 for nett 70. Youngster Steve Orinda was third on nett 72 playing off handicap five, while taking the second division title was Khush Thakkar with brilliant score of 66 nett, that left Peter Mbichire three shots behind in second placeon nett 69. Abraham Samoei was placed third on nett 71. The third division produced even better scores with Lavanya Bakhshi leading the way on nett 65, winning by two shots from K. reddy, who beat Krish Joshi on countback with nett 67. In the Ladies Medal Number Five, Channelle Wangari, who seems to have also found her winning formula, carded gross 77 for nett 70 to beat Margaret Nyakang’o by two shots in the Silver Division, where Mercy Nyanchama won the gross on seven over par 79. Jane Wokabi easily won the Bronze division with 68, winning ahead of Veronica Muthiani on 71, as Judy Njuguna claimed the gross on 98. In the Mburu and Friends Pros Golf Challenge finals, Sigona Golf Club’s resident professional, John Wangai posted a total of 783 points made up of 15 card points, 168 in the Match Play and 600 Stroke Play points. This gave him an 83 points advantage over the home pro Edwin Mudanyi, who combined 120, 480 and 100 points for a total of 700. The winner took home Sh210,000 in the event put together by friends of the pros including betting company Betika. Another Vet Lab pro Isaiah Otuke was third on 418 and in fourth place was Justus Madoya from the Great Valley Golf Resort Naivasha. Nelson Simwa and and Nelson Mudanyi followed in fifth and sixth places with scores of 324 points respectively. Down at the Coast, long hitter Charles Rob fired nett 71 to claim the A division title in the April Mug at the par 71 Nyali Golf and Country Club course, where former Mombasa Golf Club chairman Peter Kimanga was second on nett 72. The handicap five Rob, who birdied three holes in the first nine and one at the back nine, threw away a great chance of an under par score after picking up double bogeys at the 13th and 14th, having also picked up two shots at the second hole in addition to single bogeys on the 10th, 14th and 18th. The handicap 12 Kimanga could only collect seven pars and one birdie for nett 72 to finish second. Andrew Wahome, one of the leading juniors in the country, posted six over par 77 for nett 73. playing off handicap four to finish third. Wahome missed several birdies chances to settle for 13 points, having dropped shots at the first, second and seventh holes at the front nine, a double at the 14th and a four at the par three-18th. In the B division, James Githinji won with a score of 69 nett, ahead of club captain Aameen Dhanji in 71, while John Smith was third with nett 76. The C division title went to Vedck Wafula on 71, three shots better than Ijaz Sheikh with Tony Wanyama on 75 finishing third. In the D division, a new category, M.J. Patel posted 84 as Charles Rob added the A division with the gross title on his five over par 76. Meanwhile, Florence Karimi won the Silver Division in the June Ladies Medal. She posted nett 73 to win by one shot from Vanessa Peris and Susan Stokes. The Bronze title went to Zaituni Mohammed on an excellent score of 65 nett, five shots better than Pia Swatton and Lena Breitner finishing third also on nett 70. At Ruiru Sports Club, Justice Mathew Nduma Nderi combined 20 and 22 for an impressive score of 42 points to claim the overall title in the G4B annual tournament, where Erastus Thoronjo was the men winner with 42, two better than Johnson Waweru. Major George Mwaura took home the prize for a third place on 39 as Salome Mwaura produced the winning score of 38 points to win by one point from Ruth Kamau. Simon Gichuru and Michael Gitari won the nines with 21 points each as Frank Munyua fired four over par 76 to claim the gross title. Playing along with the members were a number of guests led by Eric Kangethe, who posted the day’s highest score of 44 points. Pauline Mungai and John Maina won the nearest to pin prizes, as Irene Wamoro and Chris Andrea clinched the longest drive. At Eldoret Golf Club, Aaron Kitur posted 36 points to emerge the overall winner of the Ravi@40 golf tournament. He won by one point from Danny Chelogoi, who posted 35 points. Anita Kimwatan was third with 34 points after beating Cyril Kitiwa, H.S. Plahe and Jedidah Keitany on countback. Tinu Shah and Wilson Sugut won the nines with 19 and 20 points, while winning the nearest to pin prizes were Kiran Shah and Satvinder Sagoo.