Raila Odinga’s Orange Democratic Movement has alleged a “coup” by Kalonzo Musyoka-led Wiper party in the latter’s Handshake deal with President Uhuru Kenyatta’s Jubilee. The fresh claims by the party lifts the lid on the undercurrents surrounding the scramble by political parties to cajole President Kenyatta who is set to retire in 2022 with the hope of succeeding him. Amani National Congress (ANC), led by Mr Musalia Mudavadi, has also resolved to work with the President albeit through cooperation rather than a post-election coalition agreement. Mr Mudavadi said that his party will work with Mr Kenyatta “on matters of national interest including the fight against corruption and addressing the Covid-19 pandemic”. But it is the latest move by Mr Musyoka’s Wiper to recommend a post-election deal with Jubilee that has set tongues wagging in the opposition, with ODM expressing open displeasure. Leaders of the Orange party, already working with the President after the March 9, 2018 political pact, say they sense a sinister motive in Mr Musyoka’s latest move. COALITION WITH JUBILEE “The decision was made following the realisation that the National Super Alliance (Nasa) has become totally dysfunctional,” Wiper Secretary-General Judith Sijeny revealed. She said that a Special Delegates Conference shall be convened “as soon as possible” to ratify the resolution concerning the envisaged coalition with Jubilee. But Mr Odinga’s party thinks otherwise. ODM Secretary-General Edwin Sifuna said the move is in bad taste and is aimed at undermining Mr Odinga’s party. “Everything that Kalonzo and Wiper do is meant to undermine ODM. That is their modus operandi,” said Mr Sifuna, adding that Wiper is rushing to seal the deal with Mr Kenyatta “thinking that they can now play host to us in the arrangement.” Wiper Vice-Chairman Mutula Kilonzo Jnr told the Nation that the party had not fully discussed the termination of their membership in Nasa and the legal implications of joining Jubilee. CONFUSION Jubilee Deputy Secretary General Caleb Kositany accused ODM and Wiper of flirting with Jubilee and reneging on their opposition role. “ANC also have their share of confusion after they decided to work with the government,” Mr Kositany said. With the Nasa marriage almost dead, ODM leaders said they feel lighter “without these characters called coalition partners”. “We feel extremely light. We see a new ODM that is very nimble on its feet. We will be quicker at making decisions because we are not bogged down by the baggage of having to discuss issues with the likes of Kalonzo,” Mr Sifuna said. jjochieng@ke.nationmedia.com