Egerton University Faculty of Law has stepped up its legal awareness campaign in Nakuru Country. The university, through its Legal Aid training programme dubbed “taking the law to the people," targets local administrators who interact with citizens faced with various legal challenges. The administrators are trained on how to resolve disputes within the laws of the land. The latest campaign has seen the Njoro-based campus train assistant chiefs and other administrators who interact with the citizens at the grassroots. The Dean Faculty of Law Ruth Aura said Nakuru said professional mediators play a critical role in ending disputes.  “The trained administrators and other key stakeholders will be able to use their new mediation skills to resolve any family or commercial disputes,” said Dr Aura. Dr Aura was speaking in Nakuru town on Sunday during the closing ceremony of the two-day course that was attended by more than 15 participants drawn from the 11 sub-counties. Apart from Egerton Faculty of Law, the training was jointly supported by the United Nations Development Program, Amkeni Wakenya and European Union She urged the beneficiaries to use the skills gained to help ease the court burden by resolving some of the disputes at the grassroots. “I urge you to use the skills gained for the benefit of the citizens and not for your selfish gains,” said Dr Aura. She said they should work hard to bridge the information gap to enable the faculty to reach vulnerable groups. "Legal services are not all about going to court as it could also involve mediation, arbitration, and disseminating crucial information to enlighten the general citizens on their human rights," said Dr Aura. She urged participants to visit the faculty of Law at Egerton to learn more saying, “you will get a chance to enrich your knowledge on mediation and help us to take the law to the people as you’re the missing bridge.” The next stop for the training will be in Naivasha sub-county where more chiefs, their assistants and other administrators will be trained.