Baringo Senator Gideon Moi has lost another ally in the Rift Valley, barely a week after Cherangany MP Joshua Kutuny ditched him. Emurua Dikirr MP Johana Ng’eno launched a scathing attack on the Kanu party leader in what shows the ride is not smooth for Gideon in the Rift. The two-term MP now joins the West Pokot Governor John Lonyangapuo in warming up to Deputy President William Ruto’s camp. Mr Kutuny, despite going on record that he was not attacking the Kanu boss to join the DP, accused the senator of "not having the interests of the people of Rift Valley at heart". On Wednesday, Mr Ng’eno attacked Kanu’s top leadership for questioning him for being disloyal to the party that took him to Parliament. He also took a swipe at the party's secretary-general Nick Salat, noting he will support DP Ruto , who he claimed had the interests of the community at heart. Mr Ng’eno accused his party boss, who is serving his second term as a senator, for latching onto the Building Bridges Initiative wave to build his profile and position himself in the succession matrix without involving elected leaders. An alliance between Gideon and Raila, analysts say, could throw a spanner in the works of the DP Ruto camp. Mr Ng’eno appears to be one of the faces the Deputy President is using in his new strategy to tame the resurgence of Gideon and bolster his support in the vote-rich Rift Valley. The DP has lined up his foot soldiers in the region who have started campaigning to counter the Baringo senator's spirited efforts to woo the Rift Valley. Mr Ng'eno publicly declared that he will henceforth support the DP.According to him, the mantle of leadership will head to Nandi in 2022 through Ruto and thereafter to the populous Kipsigis.The latest troubles in the Gideon camp are compounded in the populous South Rift by people questioning his ability to find a lasting solution to the Mau evictions using his close connections at State House. The senator has been quiet as local leaders and those allied to the DP condemn the evictions and mobilise resources for the victims' resettlement. “People like Salat are questioning my loyalty to the party. But just like me, they are employees of the party. I also have a position in Kanu as an elected leader. I also have a right like anyone else to ask a question. So nobody should intimidate me for questioning the party leadership. You are questioning me as who? You are the Kanu chairman, so what?” Mr Ng’eno asserted. Tiaty MP William Kamket asked Mr Ng’eno to respect Kanu or they discipline him by kicking him out. “He is biting the hand that feeds him, which is uncouth and barbaric. If he continues to misbehave we shall come for our seat,” said Mr Kamket. gsayagie@ke.nationmedia.com