Deputy President William Ruto on Friday came out to preach peace as succession politics rages amid frosty relationship between him and President Uhuru Kenyatta. Speaking at Eldoret National Polytechnic in Uasin Gishu County during the wedding ceremony of Bishop Mark Kamau, the DP said there is no need for the country to be divided because of politics. This comes barely days after he dared the ‘system’, saying he has God and the majority of Kenyans to back what he said is an unstoppable 2022 presidential campaign. In Kenyan politics, the ‘system’, sometimes referred to as the ‘deep state’, has come to refer to powerful bureaucrats, political operatives and tycoons bankrolling Kenya’s elections — a group Dr Ruto earlier this year said was working to stop him from running, or if he does, from winning in the 2022 presidential election. In his boldest shot yet at the ‘system’, often said to be backed by the sitting government, Dr Ruto Friday likened the roadblocks on his path to the 2022 presidential bid to what he said was a concerted effort to block him and President Kenyatta’s candidature in 2013. But speaking on Friday in his Rift Valley political backyard, DP Ruto said emphasised that intermarriages will play a vital role in ensuring that the country is united instead of promoting ethnicity. He was accompanied by governors Jackson Mandago (Uasin Gishu) and Josphat Nanok (Turkana), MPs Caleb Kositany (Soy), Oscar Sudi (Kapseret), Kimani Ngunjiri (Bahati) and Nakuru Senator Susan Kihika. “I would like to ask youths and others that the way of bringing the country together is by looking for friends from different corners of the country. We have to work, jell and network this country for unity purposes,” DP Ruto said. He further reiterated that cohesion requires sustained efforts, urging the public and religious leaders to work on ensuring good relations with their neighbours regardless of tribe, religion or political persuasion. “Promoting unity is the core responsibility of all leaders because if we are united, we can focus on a common agenda and a shared prosperity. Leadership is about nurturing togetherness, not division,” the DP said. According to Governor Nanok, the 2010 Constitution highlighted the importance of Kenyans living together, hence the contentious revenue sharing formula should not be used to divide the country. He asked senators to come up with a best formula. “As a country, we must live as husband and wife whether things are good or not. It is important that when we have resources, we must share them equitably to ensure that everyone is satisfied. When debate on revenue sharing formula goes on, it is important to note that everyone has a right to stay anywhere in this country,” said Mr Nanok. Mr Ngunjiri, on his part, appealed to senators to desist from making political undertones which can divide the country and instead play a uniting role as elected leaders. “These resources we want to share are from God hence we should pray so that we get more. But our senators, while debating on it, should not make utterances which can divide the country,” said the Bahati MP. The DP’s lieutenants reaffirmed their commitment to peace as the 2022 general elections draw nearer, arguing that they will not allow other politicians to divide the nation along tribal lines. “When President Kenyatta and his deputy came together in 2013, we agreed that no elections mayhem will ever take place in this country. We cannot have a situation where when there are elections, certain tribes have to travel to their home areas fearing that they will be attacked. We have to say no to this culture,” said Mr Sudi, an ardent supporter of the DP.