Red Bull’s Max Verstappen upset the form book at the 70th anniversary Grand Prix in Silverstone to win comfortably ahead of both Mercedes in a race which he controlled from the moment he took the lead. For both weekends at Silverstone, Mercedes had set itself apart on the time sheets but the team was left wondering what struck them during the race as the Red Bull strategy of bucking the trend to have Verstappen start on the hard tyre compound paid handsome dividends. Mercedes’ Valtteri Bottas had managed to beat his more illustrious teammate, Lewis Hamilton, to pole on Saturday by just 0.063 of a second on his very last flying lap. Nico Hulkenberg, standing in for Sergio Perez who tested positive for Covid-19, performed exceptionally to put Racing Point third on the grid, and on the same row as Verstappen. It was a bright return to the track for the German who missed last week’s race when the car’s power unit failed to fire up minutes before the race. But his dream of getting a podium place finish seemed shattered right at the start of the race when Verstappen’s quick launch saw him get to Turn 1 before the German. Ferrari’s Sebastian Vettel, who started eleventh, clipped the inside of the kerb into Turn 1 so heavily that he spun as a result, dropping to last position seconds into the race. His teammate, Charles Leclerc, started eighth but quickly lost two positions to McLaren’s Lando Norris and Red Bull’s Alexander Albon. Majority of the teams had opted to start on the medium tyre compound. For Mercedes, that decision began to unravel when on the sixth lap, Bottas was told that both his front and rear left tyres were critical. Albon was the first to pit on that lap. To cover Albon, AlphaTauri’s Pierre Gasly went in a lap later. The Mercedes pair was well clear of the rest of the field, except for Verstappen, who, once his hard tyres had warmed up well enough, started catching up with the Silver Arrows. A quarter way into the race, Bottas pitted to switch from mediums to hard. Hamilton, who had Verstappen breathing down his neck, did likewise a lap later. The net effect of this was that Verstappen inherited the lead and had clean air in front of him. Hamilton, who came out sixth after his pit stop, made light work of Leclerc in his quest to catch up with his teammate and the Red Bull. Leclerc made his only stop on the 18th lap, taking on a set of hard tyres. Gasly, meanwhile, was doing his best to keep Albon, the man who took his seat at Red Bull when he was demoted back to Toro Rosso last year, behind him. Albon’s persistence paid off on the 21st lap when he passed the AlphaTauri by sweeping the outside of the lengthy Turn 7. Verstappen was doing better times than both Mercs and could even afford a pit stop and still emerge ahead of Hamilton. Halfway into the race, this was music to Red Bull’s ears. For the mid stint of the race, Red Bull opted to put Verstappen on the medium compound. On exiting the pits, Bottas was just ahead of him but the Dutchman used DRS and then the inside of Turn 6 and the outside of Turn 7 to regain the lead.  Shortly thereafter, Vettel, having to grapple with midfield traffic, came up on the radio accusing his team of messing up his race, choosing a particularly inopportune time to do so. Each of the last eight races at Silverstone has had a Safety Car. So far in this historic race, it wasn’t needed. With twenty laps to go, Mercedes had both cars with the exact same level of tyre degradation. The left side pair were particularly getting a beating, 10 per cent performance left on the front tyre and just 20 per cent on the rear for both. Mercedes called Bottas in. Red Bull mirrored that call and brought in Verstappen as well. Hamilton was left out. Would the six-time world champion go to the end on his set of hards and risk a puncture like the previous week? Verstappen was 11.3 seconds behind him and being on much fresher tyres, was free to push. Hamilton was worried that his tyres would blow. This concern informed the decision to bring him in with ten laps to go. Red Bull's Dutch driver Max Verstappen celebrates after winning the race during the F1 70th Anniversary Grand Prix at Silverstone on August 9, 2020 in Northampton. - The race commemorates the 70th anniversary of the inaugural world championship race, held at Silverstone in 1950. Verstappen had opened a considerable gap to Bottas and was 7.8 seconds behind Hamilton when the Brit was called in. Hamilton came out fourth, six seconds behind Leclerc and eight seconds behind Bottas. Four laps later, Hamilton passed the Monegasque by using DRS on the approach to Turn 15. With the gap closing between the two Mercs, a decision had to be made whether to let them race or invoke the dreaded Team Orders. Both drivers were told to race as long as they gave “each other space,” code for “don’t crash into each other.” Hamilton caught up with Bottas and passed him three laps from the end on the approach to Turn 6. Getting into the last lap, Verstappen was so psyched up about his impending victory that he even joked to his team on the radio. Five races done, Hamilton leads the Championship with 107 points. With this win, Verstappen has overtaken Bottas and is second with 77, the Finn four points behind the Dutchman. Interestingly, Leclerc is fourth with 45 points, more than four times those of his teammate, four-time world champion Vettel, who is 13th with 10 points. By finishing second, Hamilton equalled Michael Schumacher’s record of 155 podium finishes. Leclerc, again did better with his car than was expected, coming in fourth, ahead of the other Red Bull of Albon.