Detectives have formally started investigations on the four police officers who were on Tuesday last week captured on camera beating up Mlango Kubwa MCA Patricia Mutheu at the City Hall. This comes after Ms Mutheu Monday recorded her statement on the attack at Nairobi’s Central Police Station. Accompanied by her lawyer, Cliff Ombeta and Nairobi County Assembly Deputy Majority Whip Waithera Chege, the ward rep was directed to the DCI offices where she recorded her statement. “We have brought Hon Mutheu here on an issue that occurred last week where she was assaulted by four police officers who mercilessly flogged her, beat her up and embarrassed her,” Mr Ombeta said. In her statement, Ms Mutheu narrated how she was allegedly assaulted by an officer identified as John Mwaniki Thathi while she was seated alone at the county assembly’s and lounge. Police officer beat Ms Mutheu at Nairobi County Assembly on July 28, 2020. PHOTO | FILE | NATION MEDIA GROUP Encounter with officer The MCA explained how her encounter with the officer turned violent after he asked her why she did not run away when she saw him. She said she did not run away because she had done nothing wrong and that City Hall was her workplace. She added that her answer did not go well with the officer who started raining blows on her. This is when the three other officers joined in flogging her. “My client was not only caused grievous bodily harm but was also mentally tortured. We are filing a case on indecent assault and physical assault. My client was shocked that the police who should have protected her ended up beating her up,” Mr Ombeta said. He also alleged that the police officers touched his client indecently yet they knew that they should have brought a female officer to handle her instead of doing it themselves. Admitted to hospital Following the incident, Ms Mutheu was admitted to the Nairobi Women’s Hospital for a day. She presented her medical documents at the police station as she recorded her statement and filled a P3 form. “In assault cases, the P3 form is a crucial document because an expert must say and ascertain that she was assaulted. That is the basis of this case,” the DCI officer investigating the case said. Recounting the assault to the Nation, the MCA said it was a painful and harrowing experience. “I was not just hurt by the physical assaults. It is true, the beatings hurt, but my family and I are traumatised, especially my young daughter,” she told the Nation. Impeachment notice On the fateful day, drama unfolded at the Nairobi County Assembly after a group of MCAs stormed City Hall seeking to file an impeachment notice against Speaker Beatrice Elachi. The rowdy MCAs clashed with police officers who had been stationed at the assembly to prevent them from accessing the chambers, to Ms Mutheu’s assault. Interior CS Fred Matiang’i publicly condemned the police officers involved in the ensuing fracas and urged the Inspector-General of Police and the Independent Policing Oversight Authority (IPOA) to follow up the matter. Consequently, the CS directed that everyone at the Nairobi County Assembly be disarmed forthwith and their gun licences withdrawn. Following the orders, 14 guns were recovered from the chambers last week. IPOA probe started Whereas the police investigations began Monday, IPOA reported that they had already started their probe. “The investigation into the matter is progressing well. If culpability will be established on completion, IPOA will make appropriate recommendations to the relevant State agency for the next course of action,” the authority’s Chairperson Anne Makori told the Nation. Police Spokesman Charles Owino declined to comment on what actions had been taken on the officers involved in the incident.