Kenyans living in slums across the country are set to benefit from an additional $150 million (about Sh16.2 billion) funding to improve infrastructure in informal settlements in a renewed upgrading programme that will rope in the ongoing Kazi Mtaani initiative. The move is expected to improve living conditions for at least 1.7 million Kenyans that live in Kenyan slums. Developments to be covered by the funding include preparation of settlement-level development plans, surveys, registry index maps, and letters of allotment or titles to enhance tenure security for these residents. The international lender says it hopes to make the funding available to Kenya immediately. “The project will also cushion urban informal settlement residents who depend on daily earnings against the negative socio-economic impact of the Covid-19 pandemic,” World Bank Operations Manager and Acting Country Director for Kenya Camille Lampart Nuamah said in a statement. Other developments to be undertaken under the project including infrastructure upgrading for basic services like roads, water, drainage, sanitation, street lighting, community facilities and livelihoods support, as well as community engagement to assess and address risks. “The World Bank is keen to continue supporting the government’s effort to the ongoing Kazi Mtaani program in the subsequent phases to reach up to 200,000 youth across all 47 counties,” Sheila Kamunyori, World Bank Senior Urban Specialist and Task Team Leader said. This is the second phase of the Kenya Informal Settlements Improvement Project (KISIP2). The first (KISIP1) was initiated in 2011 and targeted 15 municipalities including Nairobi, Mombasa, Eldoret, Naivasha, Machakos, Malindi, Kakamega, Nyeri, Thika, Kericho, Kitui, Garissa and Embu. The World Bank provided $100 million of the funding, while Agence Française de Dévelopement (AFD), Swedish International Development Agency (SIDA) and the government of Kenya, contributed $45 million, $10 million and $10 million, respectively. In addition to civil works projects, KISIP1 strengthened security of tenure for about 50,130 people.The new project is targeted at informal settlements in counties with eligible settlements and that “demonstrate readiness to implement the project”, said the World Bank. The lender says it has developed criteria to determine eligible settlements to ensure that the project has maximum impact for targeted beneficiaries.