The deal between Jubilee and the Orange Democratic Movement (ODM) on the speaker and deputy speaker positions at the Nairobi County Assembly now hangs in the balance. The parties reportedly reached an agreement last week to support each other “for the sake of restoring unity at the Assembly”. Jubilee was to take the speaker seat while ODM would settle for the deputy position. As a result, former Makadara MP Benson Mutura was voted as new speaker by 99 ward representatives. To return the favour, deputy speaker John Kamangu was to step down in favour of the ODM person this week. ODM has already nominated former Nairobi Mayor and Baba Dogo Ward Representative Geoffrey Majiwa for the position. Jubilee has, however, asked the Raila Odinga-led party to hold its horses until the position falls vacant. Deputy Majority Whip Chege Waithera questioned ODM’s rush in nominating Mr Majiwa “when the assembly still has a deputy speaker”. “Jubilee has no problem in giving up the position but the law must be followed,” Waithera said. Complicating matters further is Mr Kamangu who has asked Jubilee members to support him. “Let me take this opportunity to say that the position is not vacant. I am the deputy speaker and urge our people to listen to the rumor mongers. Stand with me,” Mr Kamangu said. According to the standing orders, the procedure of electing a deputy speaker will with necessary modification, be the same as that prescribed for the election of the speaker. Mr Kamangu, who is also the Ruai ward representative, was in danger of being impeached with former Speaker Beatrice Elachi. More than 50 ward representatives had appended their signature in support of his removal. Ms Elachi opted to resign. Jubilee Secretary-General Raphel Tuju last week admitted that there was a deal between the two parties on the positions of speaker and deputy speaker. “The speaker was a handshake candidate. There was consultations between Jubilee and ODM and we got them to support our candidate. We will also support ODM if it nominates a person for the deputy speaker’s position in the interest of bringing peace in Nairobi,” Mr Tuju, referring to the handshake between President Uhuru Kenyatta and Mr Odinga on March 9, 2018 . ODM Secretary-General Edwin Sifuna on Wednesday said the party picked Mr Majiwa as part of an agreement with Jubilee. Nairobi ODM chairman George Aladwa confirmed the deal and said a new deputy speaker would be elected this week. comulo@ke.nationmedia.com