On normal nights, Mtwapa town is usually a crowded, active town with noisy clubs and open businesses on its streets. With a 24-hour economy, there is usually no difference between night and day as businesses run throughout, unlike other towns. But the lights have now dimmed on Mtwapa’s once thriving nightlife, and with no certainty as to when the current night curfew will be lifted, players in the tourism industry are now fighting for survival. A number of those in tourism business, which earns good revenue for Kilifi County, are contemplating completely shutting down. Such an action will not only negatively affect the local economy but will also be the end of the vibrancy of the town where both local and international tourists frequent for fun and leisure. Just recently, President Uhuru Kenyatta banned the sale of alcohol in restaurants, something that dealt a blow to owners whose business had started to slowly pick up. A number of bars had converted their joints into restaurants, selling food alongside alcohol. The slowdown in business has further affected commercial sex workers who mostly get their clients from clubs and bars. According to Kilifi South Pastors Fellowship Chairperson Bishop Lawrence Chai, who is also a resident, the government should lift the ongoing night curfew to save businesses in the town from collapse. “Most of the commercial sex workers are suffering. We have to understand that that is their only source of livelihood and they too have families. I am a spiritual leader but I understand this,” he said. The fast growing coastal town had initially started losing its glory when night life and most activities moved to Bamburi, with the failure of famous clubs like Lambada. The Covid-19 pandemic has not only affected business in Mtwapa, but the health of HIV positive patients too when the Kenya Medical Research Institute indefinitely closed down its clinic and put its focus on Covid-19 research. Mr Chai said the research clinic helped provide patients with ARVs as well as counselling, but patients are now struggling, having no other outlet to get their drugs from. He further said the opportunity has given room for more spread of HIV among locals as those infected are no longer seeking treatment. “This is not a disease you will walk to any facility to seek medication for. Patients are still afraid of stigmatisation,” he said, adding that the clinic had provided a friendly and conducive environment for patients. According to Bill Magangah, the operations manager at Gasaro Hotel located in Mtwapa, closure of bars has had a huge negative economic impact on families of owners who can no longer meet their needs. He said hotels are no longer receiving many visitors following the ban on the sale of alcohol and that the owners who had hopes of recovery have been affected as the number of tourists has gone down. Kennedy Mumbo, a bar owner, said they have no hopes to reopen as many traders used their savings to provide for their families when their businesses took a hit. Mr Mumbo said reopening will still be a struggle since they know it will be under strict conditions. But the 9pm night curfew has brought relief to some residents, many who now enjoy quiet peaceful nights with the noisy clubs now silent.