The pain of losing his fourth born son in controversial circumstances is still fresh, five months later. Mr John Chesang, the father of slain Administration Police officer Sergeant Kipyegon Kenei, who was attached to deputy president William Ruto’s Harambee Annex office, said he is still waiting to be told the killers of his son. The Saturday Nation visited the slain officer’s home in Chemasis in Rongai, Nakuru County, and found Mr Chesang, in the company of a neighbour, seated under a tree. He described the death of his son as the saddest moment in his life. “At 33, my son had a big dream. His death left the family in pain that will take time to heal. My prayer is that his blood haunts those who killed him,” Mr Chesang, a retired chief, told the Saturday Nation. Mr Chesang said if detectives handling the matter could speed up the investigations, the family would have closure faster. “We don’t understand what happened but what we know is that my son never killed himself. He was a vibrant and jovial young man, full of life and with great plans. Whoever killed him will know no peace,” Chesang said. Mr Kenei had seven other siblings. “All we ask the government is to fast-track investigations. We call upon the government not to abandon us,” said a family member, who sought anonymity. Mr Chesang feels the incorporation of Federal Bureau of Investigations (FBI) will help nail the suspects. “If the Directorate of Criminal Investigations (DCI) joins hands with the FBI, I believe my son’s killers will be found. So far, the DCI under Mr George Kinoti, has done a good job and we hope those behind the murder will finally be arrested,” he said. In March, Mr Kinoti asked the FBI to join investigations into the murder of the police officer. He said there was need to widen the scope of investigations because the mysterious death occurred at the height of the Sh40 billion fake arms deal case involving former Sports CS Rashid Echesa and three other people, among them an American, who was one of the supposed suppliers of the multi-billion military hardware. Before his death, he had been summoned alongside four other police officers to record a statement over the arms saga. Mr Kenei was on duty on February 13, the day Mr Echesa accessed the DP’s office and allegedly issued a fake Sh40 billion military arms contract to two foreigners. Less than 10 days later, he was found dead in his house, with a single bullet wound on the head. Police said Mr Kenei went missing on February 19, when he was supposed to accompany his colleagues to the DCI, to record a statement on the fake arms probe. As detectives continue pursuing crucial leads that will help nail his killers, the Saturday Nation established that a team of homicide officers, which is handling the matter, is set to visit Mr Chesang’s home as they piece together information to unravel the mystery murder. “The detectives want to understand Mr Kenei’s last visit at his parent’s home in Rongai and what he was doing at his workplace on the day he was meant to be off duty and other issues that will help in the probe to his death,” said a source. According to the source, the DCI has made significant progress in the probe, with focus being put on suspects believed to have deleted data from Mr Kenei’s phone before they murdered him. Detectives still believe that Mr Kenei did not commit suicide, and there was something fishy about his death. The DCI has since successfully retrieved the data that had been deleted from the phone. “Detectives are pursuing three people believed to be masterminds of the murder. They have also managed to get his last calls, who he spoke to, and the kind of communication he had with the individuals before he died,” added the source. Efforts to reach Mr Kinoti for a comment on the progress of the investigations bore no fruit as he did not answer to our calls and text messages. Suicide note In March, an analysis of a suicide note alleged to have been written by Mr Kenei and collected on the day his body was found was analysed and found it did not match his handwriting. The note bore the words “Call my cousin Ben and brother” and went on to give the named persons’ phone numbers. Mr Kenei was the head of security at the Office of the Deputy President and was found dead in his house at Villa Franca estate in Nairobi’s Imara Daima Estate on February 20. Autopsy results revealed that he was killed by a bullet that was fired from a pistol held to his chin. Chief government pathologist Johansen Oduor revealed that Mr Kenei died a day or two before his body was found. A spent cartridge was found on his body, which was half covered with a bedsheet. Kenei had a Jericho pistol, which was found with 11 rounds of ammunition. EMatara@ke.nationmedia.com;  @ERICM222. 