Wiper leader Kalonzo Musyoka says he is ready to fight for the presidency against Deputy President William Ruto come the 2022 General Election, and that he does not need politicians such as Johnson Muthama to do it. Mr Musyoka said so on Friday after Ukambani legislators engaged in a war of words over the vote and other national issues at a function in Machakos Sub-county. Politicians allied to DP Ruto said the Wiper leader, a former vice-president, has done nothing to ensure they are appointed to government offices. Mr Muthama, who is Machakos County’s former senator, said those threatening politicians supporting DP Ruto will be chased away from Ukambani and forced to accept democracy as their votes are not enough to make someone president. He added that those in support of Mr Musyoka should form delegations from other parts of the country in order to strengthen their support bases. The former senator explained that he supports DP Ruto because he is a man with a stand, who fights on despite intimidation. “I am not with Ruto because I need anything but because of the people. I was in Wiper but I am in shock that the government you are supporting removed the leadership at Nairobi County,” he said, adding he will not accept Mr Musyoka’s “disrespect” in his support for President Uhuru Kenyatta. In response to the criticism, Mr Musyoka, who has also been criticised for not taking a firm stand on political matters, said he now has “his own mind” as a senior counsel and that he drew lessons from his 2007 attempt at the presidency. The Wiper leader said his irreducible minimum where the 2022 vote is concerned is being on the ballot. He mocked Mr Muthama, saying, "This is my riddle to Muthama; do you think Kalonzo can be Ruto's vice president? This is my question to you. Do you think my respect can allow me to deputise Ruto?" He added, “This time round I have decided I do not need anyone to negotiate on my behalf. I will not be sold like a cow in the market. Brace yourselves .… be ready because I am tired of disrespect by those always undressing me in public." The politicians spoke in Muthetheni, Mwala Sub-county, at the burial of Samuel Mutuku Mulu, first born son of the late Joseph Mulu Mutisya. Mr Musyoka described Mutisya as a vision carrier who commanded respect as he did not associate himself with corruption. Politicians who spoke at the burial said the region’s politicking changed when Mutisya died. Mr Muthama said Mutisya will always be respected for taking the Kamba nation to levels never witnessed before. Machakos Town MP Victor Munyaka said, “When Mulu Mutisya was alive 16 years ago, we saw a big difference as ministers were from all parts of Ukambani. We were in the big five, including parastatals and the police service. We need to unite as Kambas are no longer in government.” He told Mr Musyoka to fight for the region amid a looming Cabinet reshuffle. Mavoko MP Patrick Makau said the region’s current leaders should follow in Mutisya’s footsteps as he spearheaded unity. He defended Mr Musyoka for de-whipping Wiper members in Parliament and said he does not support the President. “Why are you blaming Kalonzo for removing them when he cooperated with Jubilee to deliver its manifesto and is well-suited to be the next president?” Mutisya Mwala MP Vincent Musyoka said the late politician was accountable and accessible and did not engage in graft. He said Mutisya could have accumulated wealth from the Moi regime but chose not to do so. The leaders also spoke of the Covid-19 supplies scandal involving the Kenya Medical Supplies Authority (Kemsa) and asked the President to account for all the funds allocated to efforts against the pandemic. On revenue allocation,they called upon the Senate to come up with a lasting solution to save counties from paralysis in service delivery. MP Musyoka claimed those mentioned in the Kemsa scandals had connections in the government and that DP Ruto was not involved. “Who has lost his money and found it at Ruto's home? It’s time to negotiate as Uhuru is going home and must be open to other opinions.” Nairobi Governor Mike Sonko said the Ukambani region is disrespected as leaders are divided during elections so they should unite. He said only Luhyas and Kambas tend to be divided as they use different political parties to ask for the same seat so they do not win.