Demonstrations rocked Bungoma town on Monday, a day after two main suspects in a prominent businessman's murder escaped from prison. Trader Michael Gacheche Karuga alias Cheche’s family and friends, as well the business community, took to the streets demanding justice and accusing police of being behind the escape. The two murder suspects were among at least 10 suspected criminals who made a daring escape from Bungoma Police Station on Sunday. Karuga, who owned the Shell petrol station along Bungoma-Kanduyi highway, was shot dead at Keringet Hotel near Bungoma bus park two months ago. His attackers, who used a motorcycle and were armed with a rifle, stole his Sh2 million and fled towards Mjini Estate along Bungoma-Mumias road. Several suspects were arrested on June 19 and were later arraigned and denied bond. They were held as remandees at the police station pending release of their covid-19 test results. The protesters paralysed business and transport on the busy Moi Street, waving placards and twigs, and later staged a sit-down at the police station’s main gate. They demanded the immediate transfer of all the senior police officers in the county, claiming they helped the suspects to escape. Karuga’s widow, Anne, said key suspects Brian Ochieng Onyango and John Wanyonyi were among those who escaped. Others were Clerkson Otieno (burglary), Simon Wekesa (assault), Collins Nyukuri, Alex Muyekho, Bramwel Barasa, Pascal Namasaka, Emmanuel Wakoko, John Wekesa and Isaac Wekesa. “As a family we fear for our lives because the main suspects are out, if they can drill a hole in lawful custody, what stops them from attacking us? We demand speedy arrests because we aren’t safe,” said the widow. “The case was supposed to be mentioned on August 17 while the hearing was to begin on August 26. We are shocked that they escaped. This defeats logic. There should be something beyond just escaping.” Anne further demanded to know why the suspects were transferred from Bungoma to Cheptais Police Station in Mt Elgon yet the incident took place in Bungoma town. Bungoma rights activist Philip Wanyonyi asked Interior Cabinet Secretary Fred Matiang’i and Inspector-General of Police Hilary Mutyambai to push for a speedy investigation into the businessman’s murder and the suspects’ escape. “Let Matiang’i and Mutyambai speedily transfer all the officers at Bungoma Police Station who might have slept on their jobs. We are demanding justice. There is no way key suspects, who are also very dangerous, can escape from a police cell. We are reading a sinister motive,” said Mr Wanyonyi.  Station commander Emily Salamba appealed for calm as she shared the memorandum presented to the police station with her seniors. “I had not been transferred here when the incident happened. Let me go through the memorandum then will call the family members for consultations in order to reach an amicable solution,” she said. “Our officers are combing through every location in search of the suspects.”