There was drama in Kisumu Monday as tens of youths armed with crude weapons stormed the County Public Service Board offices in Milimani. The rowdy youths attacked and injured members of staff and destroyed property as they demanded to get jobs in the county government. The group which was armed with rungus, machetes and hammers was led by Kisumu County Orange Democratic Movement (ODM) Vice-Chairman Kennedy Ajwang’ popularly known as Jege Jege. Among those injured in the attack was the county board’s Chairman Charles Babu Karan, Prof Edward Joash Kochung and other employees whom the youths found within the premises. Attack shocking Mr Victor Nyagaya, the senior advisor to Kisumu Governor Anyang’ Nyong’o, termed the 10am attack as shocking and traumatising. He told the Nation that he was holding a meeting with Prof Kochung when the youth stormed into the offices. “Professor was seeing me off when we met with armed young people who were hostile. The youth were complaining about what they termed as biased hiring of village administrators and revenue collectors in the county,” said Mr Nyagaya. Mr Nyagaya said the youth were demanding for appointment letters as reinforcement officers, claiming that some people were holding onto them. They isolated Prof Kochung and roughed him up. Luckily they did not use any crude weapons on him. Destroyed property Earlier, the youths had forced their way into Prof Kochung’s office and destroyed property including doors and files. When the Nation team arrived at the scene, police officers from the forensics department who were collecting samples from blood left at the scene of crime. Mr Nyagaya called the governor and informed him of the incident. The governor’s advisor confirmed that the attackers were known to him and was that he was surprised that Mr Ajwang’ who also works at Prof Nyong’o’s liaison office was leading the team. It is alleged that Mr Ajwang’ and his two children are employed by the county government and he was demanding to know why his wife has also not been given a job. Those who were injured during the attack were taken to hospital. Mr Nyagaya asked for deployment of security officers at the government building to prevent such incidents in future. Retaliatory attack Hours later, another group attacked Mr Ajwang’ at the ODM offices in a retaliatory attack. “Counties are fraught with local politics and if you do not protect individuals who work there, they will be harmed,” said Mr Nyagaya. Kisumu County Police Commander Ranson Lolmodooni said they are pursuing the attackers and none had been arrested by Monday afternoon. He said they are investigating the incident to establish the motive of the attack.