Aspirants seeking to clinch ward representative seats on ODM tickets in the next General Election may have to meet certain academic qualifications before being allowed to fly the party's flag. Suba South MP John Mbadi, the party’s national chairman, said this on Friday, triggering debate on the minimum qualifications needed for candidates seeking to be members of county assembly in 2022. Mr Mbadi hinted at the possibility of the party’s critical look into the matter but did not say whether ODM will push for the proposals through Parliament or implement them at party level. His sentiments followed concern about the conduct of some MCAs, with lack of or poor education cited as a determinant of the quality of debates, some of which have ended in fist fights and harsh exchanges in county assemblies. “Those who are not learned will not be nominated in the county assembly. Somebody cannot sit in the budget committee, for instance, yet he or she understands absolutely nothing about the subject,” Mr Mbadi said during an interview on a local radio station. "Pure greed" Commenting on chaos witnessed in the Homa Bay assembly, he said setting education standards will help drive change. “What we are also witnessing in county assemblies such as Homa Bay’s is pure greed by MCAs who change the leadership of the house to suit individual interests such as millions of shillings in mortgages. This is why we have been witnessing chaos in the county assemblies,” he stated. He said it is time for the party to crack the whip to stop the bad behavior of MCAs, some of whom are said blackmail governors to push their own agenda while performing poorly. Chaos erupted in the Homa Bay assembly on Wednesday during a motion to remove Clerk Daniel Kaudo from office. So dramatic were the events that Deputy Speaker Godfrey Anyango was stripped down to his underwear.  This was not the first such incident in the region. "We have tried to reconcile Homa Bay MCAs for a very long time. I dropped the matter after they felt my candidature for governors would interfere with the process," Mr Mbadi said. Mr Mbadi’s proposal comes after two failed attempts by the National Assembly in 2012 and in 2016, when the idea was for one to have a minimum of a degree certificate to become an MP of an MCA. In 2012, Parliament amended several sections of the political Parties Act and other electoral laws ahead of the 2013 General Elections but this was suspended. National Assembly members and their counterparts in the counties only needed to have a three-month post-secondary certificate to be eligible to contest in 2013. In 2013, many politicians who campaigned and won the seats were former councilors who were old and uneducated but with good oratory skills, hence the ability to sway voters. When elected, however, they hardly made contributions in county assemblies. This affected quality of debate and resulted in weak legislations since many barely understood and interrogated budget and policy documents presented to the executive. In 2016, proposed amendments Justice and Legal Affairs Committee chairman Samuel Chepkong’a, for the minimum qualification of a degree or a diploma certificate for those contesting the MCA seat, were passed but suspended for implementation in 2022. When the changes were proposed, many MCAs went back to school for fear of losing elections. Most of those in Kisumu, for instance enrolled, for courses including accountancy, community development, media and communications as well as development and governance. The current law only requires MCA candidates to have at least a Form Four certificate.