President Uhuru Kenyatta has eulogised former Likoni MP Masoud Mwahima as a statesman, witty leader and an astute grassroots mobiliser who leaves a “huge legacy”of development. Mwahima, 78, died at around 11pm on Monday at his Vyemani home in Likoni Sub-county, Mombasa, after suffering asthma complications. He was also fighting other illnesses that came with old age. "Mzee Mwahima was an approachable, witty and visionary elder and leader who offered wise counsel and outstanding service to the people of Mombasa, especially his Likoni Constituency, for decades,” President Kenyatta said in a statement on Tuesday. He added, "As a politician, Mzee Mwahima was a strong champion for community development projects, a trait that enabled him rise through Mombasa’s political ranks, serving as a councilor, mayor of Mombasa and MP for Likoni  for two terms.” The President prayed for comfort for the veteran politician’s family and friends. Deputy President William Ruto said the country has lost a "smart and formidable politician" who was a firm defender of the interests of his people and the nation. Dr Ruto said Mwahima served the people of Mombasa, those in Likoni in particular, with sustained commitment, passion and integrity. "A leader of great humility, Mheshimiwa Mwahima was tireless, fearless and a tenacious debater whose domination in our country’s political scene will be fondly remembered,” he said on his social media pages. Mombasa Governor Hassan Joho said the prominent leader was “a pillar of strength and always stood firm in defence of the people of likoni and Mombasa at large”. Mwahima served as deputy mayor and mayor from 1999 to 2002 and was elected Likoni MP in 2007. He was previously the councilor of Shika Adabu and Kanu’s Likoi branch chairman. The politician was first elected to Parliament in 2007/08 on an ODM ticket and re-elected in 2013. He served until 2016, when he ditched the party and joined Jubilee. Mwahima contested the Likoni MP seat on the Jubilee ticket in the 2017 election but lost to current MP Mishi Mboko who won on an ODM ticket He will be buried at the Vyemani cemetery near his home on Tuesday afternoon.