With the Covid-19 vaccine still months away and more people getting sick, those with mild symptoms have turned to home remedies to ease their pain. According to research, home remedies with antiviral properties help build immunity and manage symptoms such as fever, sore throat and cough. Ginger Ginger is among the healthiest spices in the world known for its rich nutrients, as well as its anti-inflammatory, antibacterial and antiviral properties. The herb contains antioxidants — compounds that help the body fight off diseases, including those that affect the lungs. Scientific research around the significance of ginger has shown that it inhibits rhinovirus, which causes the common cold. A 2013 research published on the National Centre for Biotechnology Information showed that fresh ginger has anti-viral activity against several human respiratory diseases. The study also pointed out that fresh ginger was more effective than dried ginger. Ginger also contains gingerol (the bioactive substance in fresh ginger), which can help lower the risk of infections. In addition to benefits to the respiratory system, ginger is useful in reducing inflammation and supporting cardiovascular health. Several patients with Covid-19 have indicated that they experienced muscle pain and soreness. To relieve this symptom, patients can take ginger as it is known to be effective against muscle pain. Citrus fruits (lemons and oranges) Lemon works similarly to Apple Cider Vinegar as a rinse. PHOTO | FILE Citrus fruits are rich sources of Vitamin C and fibre. A 58-gramme lemon can provide over 30 milligrams of Vitamin C, while a large orange provides over 100 per cent of the required daily intake. Vitamin C is essential for relieving flu-like symptoms or common cold as well as providing protection against immune system deficiencies. Medical research has shown that high levels of vitamin C in the body is an indicator of overall good health, which is related to heightened immunity and longer life. People with a vitamin C-rich diet have been found to be at lesser risk of contracting the common cold. Given that the body is not able to make or store it, it is advisable to include many Vitamin C-rich food in your daily diet. Vitamin C is also a powerful antioxidant that can strengthen the body’s natural defences by boosting the immune system. Consuming Vitamin C can increase blood antioxidant levels by up to 30 per cent. They also encourage the production lymphocytes and phagocytes (types of white blood cells), which help protect the body against infection. In addition, Vitamin C protect cells from harmful molecules called free radicals, which when accumulate, they can promote oxidative stress and result to chronic diseases. As Covid-19 has showed signs of affecting other body organs in the body such as the liver, heart and disrupts the body balance, vitamin C can help reduce such complications. They are known to help lower blood pressure as studies show vitamin C help blood vessels relax. Vitamin C also reduces the risk of heart disease, prevent iron deficiency in the body and improve hydration which is essential for recovering patients. Most people consume lemon by adding fresh slices to hot or cold water. Some people add honey, ginger, turmeric, cinnamon or mint to add flavour. Oranges, on the other hand, can be peeled and eaten just like any other fruit. Nutritionist advice that adult males should consume 90 milligrams of vitamin C per day while females should consume 75 mg per day. During pregnancy, women should have 85 mg a day, and 120 mg while breastfeeding. Honey A bottle of honey. PHOTO | FILE | NATION MEDIA GROUP One of the oldest natural home remedies known to man, honey is today commonly used to soothe coughs and sore throat, making it an easy option for many who are under home-based care for mild to moderate Covid-19 symptoms. Nutritionists prefer people to take raw honey, which has more nutritional value as compared to those which have undergone pasteurisation. It contains varied amounts of vitamins and minerals, including calcium, magnesium, manganese, potassium, zinc, riboflavin and pantothenic acid, among other nutrients. Honey is a natural antibacterial and antimicrobial agent. Its chemical composition contains hydrogen peroxide and glucose oxidase as well as a low pH level, which means it does not only prevent bacteria to grow, it also kills harmful bacteria and fungi. Several studies have suggested that honey may be as or more effective than some over-the-counter cough medicines for cough and sore throat, particularly for children. However, it should never be given to children under the age of one due to the risk for botulism. To ease Covid-19 symptoms such as a sore throat or cough, add one or two teaspoonfuls of honey to hot tea with lemon. Avoid other liquids or foods immediately afterward to allow the honey to coat the throat. Apple Cider vinegar Apple cider vinegar. PHOTO | FILE Apple cider vinegar is a popular home remedy that has been used for centuries in cooking and medicinal purposes. It is made by combining apples with yeast, which converts the sugar into alcohol, giving it the sour taste and strong smell. Apple cider vinegar has various health properties, including antimicrobial and antioxidant effects. It contains a variety of minerals such as magnesium, iron, phosphorus, manganese, amino acids, and antioxidants. It might offer other benefits such as aiding weight loss and reducing cholesterol, lowering blood sugar levels, and improving the symptoms of diabetes. Other studies have also shown that apple cider vinegar has antimicrobial effects and is effective in fighting off bacteria. It is also proved to help quicken the recovery process. Due to its acidic nature, the liquid can be used in moderation to break down mucus in the throat and stop bacteria from spreading, thus it is effective for sore throats— a major symptom of Covid-19. In the event of an oncoming sore throat, try diluting one to two tablespoons of apple cider vinegar in one cup of water and gargle with it. Follow this up with a small sip of the mixture and repeat the entire process one to two times per hour, depending on the severity. Ensure to drink plenty of water in between the gargling sessions, this will prevent any throat burns as well as protect the teeth from damage.