The biggest sports competition this country has hosted is the 1987 All Africa Games. The games were staged in Nairobi from August 1 to August 12, 1987 and involved athletes from 42 countries competing in 14 sporting disciplines. The continental sports extravaganza was in fact originally scheduled for 1982 in Nairobi, but Kenya was utterly unprepared then, totally lacking in facilities that would host such an event.  Nyayo National Stadium was then under construction to be completed in 1983 and become our biggest and most modern sports facility, with the other existing arena, the rudimentary City Stadium just fit to perhaps host a local derby between AFC Leopards and Gor Mahia. The dates for the All Africa Games were pushed back to 1986 by the now defunct Supreme Council for Sports in Africa that used to organise the games then, but still Kenya was not ready.  They games were eventually held a year later following the construction of the Chinese-funded Moi International Sports Centre. At that time, it was an ultra-modern sports facility boasting of a 60,000-seater arena with an eight-lane running track and a pitch, an eight-lane warm-up track and pitch, an Olympic-size swimming pool, all-purpose indoor arena and hostels. There was provision to build a golf course, tennis courts amongst other facilities. It put Kenya proudly in the league of nations with enviable stadiums. There is a point to talking about this impressive edifice. It ended up being the overwhelming and deeply impactful legacy that the games bestowed on the country. President Moi, God rest his soul, in one major government investment, conferred on this nation a facility that continues to be revered and utilised by Kenyans. It is worth noting that 33 years later, Moi International Sports Centre is still the biggest and best multi-purpose sports facility in Kenya. However, the Fourth All Africa Games brought another legacy to Kenyan sport.  Corruption. An opaque contract was signed between the Kenyan government and some US public relations company called Berg and Associates to market the games globally. The deal ended up costing Kenya’s tax payers millions of shillings with nothing to show for it while several top government officials walked away much the richer Fast forward to 2017 when Nairobi successfully hosted the IAAF Under-18 World Youth Championships.  Was there any legacy from the event? New hostels for the games village were built at Kenyatta University and a modern, press centre set up at MISC, but was as soon dismantled. However, many will also remember the familiar reports of corruption with Sh1.7 billion out of an allocated Sh3.5 billion for the championships unaccounted for, according to a report by the Auditor General in 2018.  Maybe we should now start thinking of a different kind of legacy that may not cost us as much in wanton theft and wastage when we host major international events. The World Athletics Under-20 Champions, originally scheduled for Nairobi last month was pushed back to August next year because of the Covid-19 pandemic. Local organisers thus have another year to fine-tune their preparations for the global championship. I will be interested to know what legacy they will want to pursue.  Clearly, there will be no legacy to bequeath the Kenyan people in terms of new infrastructure that I am aware of. That is well enough.  In fact, knowing how Kenya operates, a purported grandiose legacy that will involve spending tons of money, will just be a conduit for theft of public funds. They could consider the legacy of the 2019 Fifa Women’s World Cup. A report published earlier this year by the French Football Federation and the Local Organising Committee for the 2019 Fifa Women’s World Cup highlighted the social, economic and environmental legacy the tournament left in France. The study revealed that the tournament made a contribution of 284 million Euros to France’s GDP with all nine host cities and regions benefiting from the championship. It is not surprising that the whole country proudly felt ownership for the tournament and the fact that it attracted close to 1 million gate paying French spectators brings that point home quite nicely.  There were other programmes done that benefited the community and helped clean the environment including 6.4 tonnes of food waste collected and donated to local community-based associations; 1 ton of bottle caps collected and donated for recycling and 210,200 cigarette butts collected and recycled.  Less costly programmes but highly impactful on the environment and behaviour. If nothing else, let the under-20 championships in Nairobi be held corruption free. That would be a worthy legacy. cnyende@ke.nationmedia.com 