Police in Kisii County are searching for their colleague Eunice Achieng Okal, who was last seen on July 30. Constable Achieng, who was based at Nyanchwa Police Station, asked for a day off on July 29, saying she wanted to visit her sick grandmother in Migori County. Preliminary investigations say she did not visit the grandmother but met her ex-husband John Owuor Odiango in Kisii. But Mr Odiango was found dead at his home in Oyugis, Homa Bay County, on August 7, in a case of a suspected suicide. Kisii County Police Commander Jebel Munene said the police officer was supposed to return to work on July 31. “We instigated disciplinary action against her on that day after she failed to return to work,” Mr Munene said, adding the process was cancelled after her relatives reported that she had been missing since August 4. “On August 6, the ex-husband’s relatives and those of the missing officer separately reported the persons missing at Nyanchwa Police Station,” the police boss said, adding that the man left Bomet, where he worked, for Kisii on July 29. Reports indicate that Ms Achieng and her former husband met in Kisii to finalise a deal in which she was to get Sh250,000 from him, from a business they co-owned. As Mr Odiango’s relatives were making a report on their missing kin at Nyanchwa, one of them received a phone call and was informed that he had been spotted in Oyugis and that he appeared to be of unsound mind. “They searched for him until midnight but could not get him. His naked body was found hanging from the roof the following day. His clothes were found dumped at his neighbour’s compound,” a police source said, adding his ex-wife’s shawl was used in the hanging. Mr Munene said that before Mr Odiango’s body was found, police had traced his phone signal to Kilgoris. “On August 6, our officers, in conjunction with those from Nakuraro Police Station in Kilgoris, combed the area and searched through sugarcane plantations but found nothing,” he said. The police officer’s phone signal was last traced to Rongo. Sources revealed that M-Pesa transactions were made using Ms Achieng’s phone before it went off. Further, it is believed the two were using a car to move around and that it may have had other occupants.