The rift in Ford-Kenya party has widened, with a faction led by Bungoma Senator Moses Wetang’ula accusing a group led by Tongaren MP Eseli Simiyu and Kanduyi MP Wafula Wamunyinyi of conducting primaries to elect new officials. On Monday, party officials from Kakamega County cautioned the two against pushing for the primaries, saying the exercise was concluded and names of elected officials presented to the Registrar of Political Parties. The 12 chairpersons drawn from each of the 12 sub-counties urged Mr Wamunyinyi and Mr Simiyu to respect the party’s constitution and desist from promoting a coup. In a statement read by Mumias East sub-branch chairman Bernard Mwimali, officials said it was illegal for the two members to purport to hold grassroots polls yet they were not in the leadership team. “We want to strengthen the party and would not wish for a continued power struggle that will taint its image. We shall continue working with Senator Wetang’ula as the bonafide party leader,” the statement said. Mr Wetang’ula, who attended the meeting in Matungu Sub-county, warned Mr Simiyu and Wamunyinyi against conducting primaries, saying the party completed grassroots elections that kicked off mid last year. The senator said Ford-Kenya conducted its primaries from 2019 and elected officials up to the county level. “We were heading to the General Council and the National Delegates Conference when Covid-19 broke out and the government banned public gatherings. We will adhere to restrictions until the virus is contained,” he said. Mr Simiyu denied allegations that his faction was holding grassroots polls, saying they were completed. He said that after Mr Wetang'ula's faction moved to court to challenge his ouster as party leader, everything was put on hold until September 25. “We are politicians so we cannot just sit and wait. We are meeting party officials in the counties to prepare our party for the 2022 General Election. They should accept to face consequences of waiting,” he said. He accused Mr Wetang'ula of moving to counties to remove leaders opposed to his leadership.