As coronavirus continues to disrupt lives, the youth in Nakuru County have been urged to form groups and venture into business to cushion them against the effects of the pandemic. This, according to entrepreneurs, will see them attract funding from the government and Non-Governmental Organisations. A number of NGOs are willing to inject millions of shillings to assist the youth start business to transform their lives. Ustadi Foundation Chief Executive Officer George Mazuri told the youth that if they plan well and show commitment in their work, they will stand a high chance to get donor support. Mr Mazuri said such support would only be extended to the serious youth groups. "Youth who will show total commitment to exploit their business potential by achieving the target results will attract donor funding,” said Mr Mazuri. Recently, the foundation delivered business equipment worth millions of shillings to several youth groups at Nakuru Youth Polytechnic. The youth groups from Nakuru Town East and Bahati constituencies were presented with posho mills and milk storage facilities. Ustadi Foundation is partnering with United Nation's International Fund for Agriculture Development (IFAD) to fight poverty and hunger in the rural counties of Nakuru and Kilifi in a programme that was started in 2018. The initiative targeting Youth Economic Empowerment programme dubbed “Agribusines in Vijabiz Project” aims at creating sustainable youth enterprises. Mr Mazuri said IFAD had injected Sh200 million to support youth groups in the two counties. Some of the beneficiaries include Henrock Youth Group (Nakuru East) and Green Belt Youth Group (Bahati) who received a posho mill and a milk pasteuriser, a cooler and a generator each worth Sh1 million, while Tiger Youth group received a roller mill worth Sh1 million. Mr Mazuri warned that the groups that fail to utilise the equipment well that their machines will be repossessed and contracts cancelled. "You must utilise these facilities as stated in your signed contracts or else they will be repossessed and be awarded to serious youth groups," said Mr Mazuri. Green Belt Youth Group Vice-chairman Josephat Gachomba pledged to support the IFAD sponsored projects and promised to transform the youth group into a dairy company. "We started as a small group but we are steadily developing into a big enterprise that will soon turn into a public limited company," said Mr Gachomba. At least 500 youth groups submitted their applications for funding but only 10 were successful. Nakuru County Directors of Youth Affairs David Mwangi and his Agriculture counterpart Ann Odhiambo said the devolved unit was committed to see the youth groups engage in meaningful income generating ventures.