Health Cabinet Secretary Mutahi Kagwe has announced that people who have tested positive for Covid-19 in Kenya remain at 31. Mr Kagwe said two of the patients are admitted at the Aga Khan Hospital in critical condition - a French national and a Kenyan, both male. Tracking coronavirus He said that 156 samples have been tested in the last 24 hours and all have tested negative and, therefore, the total confirmed cases remain 31. He said the cases are spread out across five counties where Nairobi has 21 cases, Kilifi (six), Mombasa (two), Kaijiado (one) and  Kwale (one). Of the positive cases, 19 are male and 12 are female. He added that 136 people have been discharged after completing the mandatory 14-day follow up, while five at Mbagathi Hospital are waiting test results, saying 752 people have been tested so far. The CS also announced that the government will embark on mass testing of more than 2,000 persons who arrived in the country last Sunday and are under mandatory quarantine. This will be done along WHO guidelines and in accordance with one’s arrival date. At the same, Mr Kagwe said will be only one channel of communication on matters coronavirus to avoid causing confusion. Meanwhile, the nationwide curfew announced Wednesday will start this evening with the CS saying no new positive cases doesn’t mean we should relax. Mr Kagwe said curfew will cause inconvenience and it’s regrettable but necessary. Inspector General of Police Hillary Mutyambai said the curfew will apply to entire country every day from 7pm until 5am until further notice. All persons present in Kenya shall remain indoors within said period with the exception of those providing 20 essential services as outlined in the Kenya Gazette. The order prohibits public movement individuals or groups with those found violating the curfew to be arrested and charged in court. The police will be in operation this evening and will put roadblocks across the country. They will require IDs from personnel to confirm they are on legitimate and on duty.  