Some 20 Pentecostal Assemblies of God (PAG) pastors have sued the church’s board of trustees over alleged mismanagement of the multimillion-shilling Preachers Retirement Benefits Scheme. Led by Reverend Humphrey Goren, the pastors claim the scheme, which is administered by Reverend Nathan Ondego, is being mismanaged and its assets wasted. In documents filed at the High Court in Milimani, Nairobi, the pastors say they are likely to suffer great loss and damage because the scheme is unlikely to recover. Through lawyer John Khaminwa, the pastors say they have been making monthly contributions to the scheme from their salaries and that their contributions are part of the benefits of employment. They have listed 11 respondents, among them reverends Nathan Ondego and James Ogendi, the board of trustees, the church’s executive caretaker committee, the Attorney-General, the registrar of societies and the national police service. The scheme has two accounts at the Bank of Baroda and the Co-operative Bank, into which the contributions are deposited. “Reverend Nathan Ondego and James Ogendi are using the accounts as their personal piggy banks, in complete disregard of the provisions of the Retirement Benefits Authority Act and if not restrained, the assets of the scheme will be wasted and will cause the petitioners to suffer a great irretrievable loss,” Reverend Goren says in his supporting affidavit. Since 2002, Reverend Goren says, Reverend Ondego has being the administrator of the scheme while Reverend Ogendi has been a member of the board of trustees. He says the aggrieved pastors have worked diligently for the church, which is large and has branches all over the country. The petitioners are seeking orders stopping reverends Ondego and Ogendi, members of the fund scheme and the caretaker committee from accessing any of the properties pending hearing and determination of the case. They also want the respondents restrained from entering the church’s headquarters and houses and be restrained from inciting and dividing members. They also want bank statements and deposit slips released. The case will be mentioned tomorrow before the duty judge at the Milimani Law Courts in Nairobi.  