Nakuru Public Service Board (NPSB) may not achieve its mandate due to lack of funds. A report tabled at the Nakuru County Assembly by Leader of Majority Moses Ndung’u Kamau revealed the board faces challenges including inadequate human resource policies and regulations. The eight-page report covers the period January – December 2019 in accordance to the County Government Act of 2012. DISBANDED The board was reconstituted in August 2019 after Governor Lee Kinyanjui disbanded the previous one led by Dr Waithanji Mutiti. It is currently led by Mr Paul Muthangya as the acting chairperson. Other NPSB members include Simon Rabwet, Serah Mwangi, Mary Yiapan and Joyce Ndegwa who is its secretary. The report further revealed that lack of budget allocation has hindered NPSB’s functions including crucial staff surveys and corruption awareness campaigns among others. The board also lacks an office and qualified staff to execute its mandate. To mitigate against these challenges, the Assembly has made several recommendations aimed at empowering NPSB to execute its mandate. “The board will require funding to engage consultants to formulate the required human resource policies that will result in enhancing public service delivery,” said the report. ADDITIONAL FUNDING The House recommended an additional funding to be included in the supplementary budget in the current financial year or in the 2020 / 2021 financial estimates. The report says the funds will cater for office equipment such as computers and vehicles. The proposed funding will also enable the board hire more staff and ensure the workers operate in a conducive environment. NPSB’s immediate task will be to recruit municipal board managers for Naivasha and Nakuru municipalities. This is in accordance with the provision of Urban Areas and Cities Act following the assembly’s approval of the municipalities’ charters last year. The delay in appointing the two key managers was occasioned by the disbandment of the board which was picked during former Governor Kinuthia Mbugua’s regime.  