An inspector of police in Siaya County who was found drinking with revellers during curfew hours on Saturday is under investigation for assaulting and injuring a senior who confronted him over the matter. The police inspector in charge of Sega police post identified as Hussein Abdulahi is said to have been among revellers who were found drinking at a bar in town at 8 pm on Saturday, in defiance of a curfew imposed by President Uhuru Kenyatta as part of measures to contain spread of Covid-19. Directorate of Criminal Investigations (DCI) detectives in Siaya have launched investigations into an incident where the officer is said to have assaulted and injured the officer in charge of Ukwala police station (OCS) in the head. A team of DCI officers from Ukwala who were combing the area to enforce the curfew, led by corporal Martin Wanyonyi, stormed the bar and found the senior policeman drinking with other revellers. When the DCI team asked the officer why the bar was still open, he reportedly drew his pistol and shouted at them, according to a police incident report seen by the Nation. The officers are said to have alerted the officer in charge of Ukwala police station (OCS), Chief Inspector Timothy Kwemoi, who immediately rushed to the scene in the company of three other officers. When the OCS arrived, the inspector who was drunk started shouting and attempted to draw his pistol but was quickly disarmed by his colleagues. It was during his arrest that he allegedly assaulted the OCS on the head. The inspector was also reportedly injured on his arms in the commotion. He was booked in a cell on Saturday night at Ukwala police station but released on free bond on Sunday morning, according to a source. He was expected to record statements with Siaya DCIO Nelson Muhaya who is the investigating officer. Siaya county police commander, Francis Kooli, confirmed that the officer was being investigated. DEFIANT MCAs Meanwhile police in Siaya have launched a manhunt for two MCAs from the county who defied the Ministry of Health directive on public gatherings by attending a funeral in Nyadorera area on Sunday. Mr Kooli said the two had been summoned to record statements. "We have summoned them to report to Siaya police station, failure to which we will have them arrested. We will also consider placing them on quarantine," he said. The county police boss noted that they have a problem with elites in the area who are defying government directives meant to contain the virus. "While other residents are cooperating with us on efforts to curb the spread of the virus, we have noted a level of defiance among the elite and middle class and some elected leaders who tend to use their positions to frustrate these directives," he said. Police have also revealed that that some people were still attending funerals in droves in contravention of the rule that only 15 immediate family members should attend such gatherings. Tracking coronavirus  