Former Nairobi Finance Executive Pauline Kahiga could be in for more trouble as she is now facing jail for contempt of court. This comes after being summoned to appear before the High Court in Nairobi Monday for sentencing over alleged failure to pay a Sh10.2 million judgment debt awarded to Kepha Maobe on behalf of 365 residents of Kimathi Estate in a case filed against the county government in 1997. In documents seen by the Nation, Ms Kahiga has been warned that she risks having a warrant of arrest issued against her should she fail to appear in court on Monday. SUMMONED “The High Court has summoned you in your official capacity to appear for sentencing on March 9, 2020 for reasons outlined above…,” said the court summons served by Andrew Ombwayo & Co. Advocates dated March 4, 2020. “That you are duty bound to pay the judgment debt above of Sh10,247,610 exclusive of interest being costs of the suit, before the date of sentencing, which shall mitigate your contempt,” added the summons. Ms Kahiga will appear before Justice John Mativo at the High Court in Milimani for her sentencing. “It is hereby ordered that summons to issue to one Pauline Nyambura Kahiga Waititu to attend court on March 9, 2020 for sentencing. You, the said Pauline Nyambura Kahiga Waititu, are required to attend court on March 9, 2020 at 9am without fail,” read the order signed by High Court deputy registrar. SACKED On Friday last week, Governor Mike Sonko degazetted Ms Kahiga as City Hall’s Finance CEC and appointed in her place former Trade Executive Allan Igambi. “It is notified for the general information of the public and pursuant to the Executive Order No 11 dated December 5, 2019, I, Mike Mbuvi Sonko has appointed Allan Igambi as the substantive Finance and Economic Planning CEC and degazetted the appointment of Pauline Kahiga with effect from January 30, 2020,” read the March 6, 2020 gazette notice. The move finally brought to an end a power tussle at the Finance department that has been ongoing since December last year after Sonko fell out with Ms Kahiga over the payment of pending bills. WRANGLES The wrangle was so vicious that at one time rowdy youths attempted to eject Ms Kahiga from her office following her sacking on January 30, 2020. However, a bid by Sonko to have Mr Igambi replace Ms Kahiga was delayed for more than a month after Government Printer Mwenda Njoka rejected the changes arguing that the gazettement of Mr Igambi to replace Ms Kahiga was not done in accordance with the law. This led to a stalemate that forced Sonko, through lawyer Harrison Kinyanjui, to move to court to contest the decision. Mr Njoka then sought an advisory opinion from the Attorney-General on the matter. However, last month, Solicitor General Kennedy Ogeto ruled that Governor Sonko was right to reshuffle his Cabinet, including appointing a substantive CEC, paving the way for Mr Igambi to finally assume office.  