Former Kiambu governor William Kabogo has taken a swipe at three Mt Kenya governors accusing them of being responsible for the ‘mess’ that occurred on Saturday at Kinoru Stadium in Meru during a meeting to rally support for the Building Bridges Initiative (BBI) report. The rally witnessed a mass walkout after Gatundu South MP Moses Kuria and Senate Majority leader Kipchumba Murkomen, who are supporters of Deputy President William Ruto, left in a huff. Mr Kabogo said governors Kiraitu Murungi (Meru), Anne Waiguru (Kirinyaga) and Francis Kimemia (Nyandarua) should take responsibility for what happened during the rally. STIPEND A video of some of the attendants ferried to the stadium in school buses emerged online showing them protesting over the Sh500 stipend they were paid. While responding to a tweet by ODM leader Raila Odinga on the meeting, Mr Kabogo said, “Gov Kiraitu, Waiguru and Kimemia should take responsibility for this mess. Do rallies in your counties and asses your ground. You may end up quitting.” According to Mr Kabogo, the agenda of BBI as envisioned by President Uhuru Kenyatta and Mr Odinga has drastically changed. “It’s now competition as to who will become the Mt Kenya leader after H.E. UK (President Kenyatta). No one will force a leader on us, take that to the Bank. Vitu kwa ground ni different (the reality on the ground is different),” said Mr Kabogo. REGIONAL KINGPIN A host of politicians in the region are said to be eyeing the region kingpin’s position upon President Kenyatta’s exit from State House. Others are of the view that Mr Kenyatta will continue to be the regional kingpin after his retirement. Among those touted as possible successors are Mr Kabogo, former Cabinet secretary Mwangi Kiunjuri, Cabinet Secretary Peter Munya, Governor Murungi and Murang’a Governor Mwangi Wa Iria. Ms Waiguru, who has lately become Mr Odinga’s political ally and has been attending all the BBI rallies, is also among those being mentioned in the succession debate. RAILA TWEET Following the rally in Meru, Mr Odinga on his Twitter handle had said, “Our brothers and sisters from the Mt Kenya region have spoken. The issues they want addressed through the BBI process include agricultural sector reforms, increased devolution funding, youth and women empowerment and constitutional timeframes for corruption cases.” But in reaction, Mr Kabogo told him that things are not rosy and that the ODM leader should ask the governors organising the BBI rallies to do so in their own counties. “Baba (Mr Odinga), this is not as rosy as people would want you to believe. Ask those so-called organisers, more so governors, to do train shows in their counties, then you’ll know the real position on the ground,” Mr Kabogo told Mr Odinga.  