Kenya has confirmed its first Coronavirus case. Health Cabinet Secretary Mutahi Kagwe on Friday said the patient is a Kenyan who travelled from US via London. He said that although the patient, a Kenyan, is stable and eating, she will not be released from hospital until she is confirmed negative. The woman is at Kenyatta National Hospital's Infectious Disease Unit. The government says it has traced all contacts the patient made since her arrival. Consequently, Kenya has suspended all travel outside the country unless necessary. Public gatherings are also suspended, including all inter-schools events. KEEP CALM CS Kagwe urged Kenyans to remain calm, noting that there's no need for panic or worry provided people abide by the measures put in place. "This is not a time to assign blame but one to join hands to ensure this pandemic does not tear through our country. This is not the time to make abnormal prices," he warned pharmacies and business people. PUBLIC TRANSPORT Transport Cabinet Secretary James Macharia, who was present at the press conference, said all public transport operators were summoned on March 10 for a special stakeholder meeting. He said the government will be conducting training at bus stops from 10 am to 4 pm that will involve all bus drivers, matatu drivers and conductors. "Public transport carries the vast majority of our people...more than 90 per cent. That is why we are giving it special focus." HEALTH ACT RULES CS Kagwe has invoked the Public Health Act which requires Kenyans to: 1. Maintain a distance of atleast 1 metre from persons who are coughing2. Those coughing and have fever and difficulty in breathing should stay at home3. All public gatherings, and events that have large gatherings4. Suspension of interschool events but schools will remain open5. Public transport operators will be required to regularly clean their vehicles and provide sanitizers to passengers 6. Suspension of all visits to prisons for the next 30 days7. Kenyans have been warned against spreading misinformation8. Unless absolutely necessary, travelling to affected countries have been banned  More follows..  