Nakuru County Government will set up more isolation centres as it intensifies the fight against coronavirus. Governor Lee Kinyanjui on Tuesday said the additional centres will be in Nakuru, Gilgil and Naivasha towns. He said boarding schools will also be turned into isolation centres should the situation worsen. WEIGHTY ISSUES “Weighty issues that call for team work, we will have ward committees to enable mitigation begin at the lowest levels,” said Mr Kinyanjui. He added: “When planning for a crisis, you think like a pessimist, you prepare for the worst and it is better to have extra drugs and equipment.” Governor Kinyanjui said his administration is planning to spend Sh250 million on food and equipment to mitigate against the crisis in buying food and equipment. The money will be used to take care of the poor, the elderly and other logistics including the provision of essential services in temporary markets and bus stops. It will also be used to buy drugs and hire part time health workers should the number of coronavirus positive cases increase. “The money is not enough because our revenue collection has gone down due to disruption of our sources like parking and market fees among others,” he added. LOCUST INVASION Mr Kinyanjui noted that owing to the coronavirus pandemic disruptions, the county is anticipating a difficult financial year. The governor also revealed that his administration will spend Sh30 million to address the locust invasion in the region. Meanwhile, Nakuru County Assembly reconvened on Tuesday after a two-week recess. Top on the agenda was a review of the impact of the Covid-19 on Nakuru residents. “The assembly will take a firm decision on the pandemic and institute a raft of prevention measures to cushion residents in the 55 wards,” said Kabazi MCA Peter Mbae. He added: “The assembly will also consider a supplementary budget to mitigate against the effects of the pandemic.” SUPPLEMENTARY BUDGET Mr Kinyanjui said the supplementary budget will be tabled in the House on Wednesday. Small scale traders in the county have borne the brunt of economic disruption as they have been forced to shift their operation zones from the Central Business District (CBD). The county has launched a campaign to safeguard the safety of the residents by decongesting some of the markets in Nakuru town and bus stops by relocating them outside the CBD.  