'Show me your shoes and I will tell you who you are' is the conclusion a published study by a pool of researchers at the University of Kansas seems to have reached. The study shows that the types of shoes people wear reveal more about them than conventionally thought. Participants of different ages, social backgrounds and professions took tests that determined their personalities based on the shoes they preferred. They also explained their choices and surprisingly, the results were consistent. Factors such as levels of income, temperaments, composure and the general outlook of life, were all gathered just by looking at the shoes the people chose. Below are the stunning conclusions . 1.Colourful Shoes Should you find yourself with plenty of these kind of shoes, you are an extroverted individuals who loves to flaunt what you have. This is evident with many boisterous celebrities who love to be seen and heard. Within your cycle of friends, chances that whoever has colourful shoes is the most talkative and feels confident in his or her own skin, judging by factors such the manner of expression. 2. Expensive shoes Individuals with expensive shoes tend to be top earners in the market, often lacing their feet with designer footwear that costs an arm and a leg in order to impress. Such individuals tend to work in highly competitive environments and take themselves very seriously. They are business-minded and prefer to make silent statements through their dressing. Good examples are Hollywood superstars, who wear expensive and often custom clothes and shoes and complete their looks with equally expensive accoutrements. They often wear brands including Jimmy Choo, Christian Louboutin, Roger Vivier, and Oxford. 3. Old but very well maintained shoes This kind of shoes belongs to the industrious fellows who take their work very seriously and perform their duties thoroughly. People who were these shoes are conscientious and never abandon their responsibilities. Often, they tend to perform noble tasks and are willing to forego benefits for the sake of their calling. They do not waste their resources. 4. Boots Just like soldiers put on boots before they go to war, so do the wearers of these shoes. They are aggressive by nature and prefer to be in charge. Their willingness to handle matters hands-on often tends to make people rely on them as they make even the toughest of assignments appear very easy. Women who consistently put on boots show more masculine traits and often take the leading roles in their relationships. 5. Flat shoes These are the individuals who seldom want to be heard or even seen. They marvel in carrying out their roles silently without seeking any attention. Women with an affinity for this kind of shoes glow in their femininity and feel girly when adorned in such. Their work ethic is unquestionable and they are also very practical and agreeable. They are often up to a good time and loud laughs. 6. Shabby shoes Ever seen individuals who show up in embarrassing flip flops to dates? Sometimes it’s inexpensive old sneakers with unimpressive colours. Interestingly, these people walk around as if they own the world and give no care or thought to what others think. The study found that people who love shabby shoes tend to be liberal thinkers. In Kenya, they are fondly referred to as the I-don’t-cares. They are quite vocal about their beliefs and hardly back down when discussing matters that affect their well-being. 7. New shoes Have the latest and trendiest pairs of shoes is common among fashionistas. However, those who constantly wear new pairs shoes display the trait of anxious attachment. They are unsure of their place in people’s lives and constantly fear they will be rejected if they do not pay close attention to their looks. 8. Boring shoes It is natural to always want to give the best first impression. This being a biological fact, people work on their shoe game because people take notice. It therefore beats logic for one to always attend gatherings in boring shoes that squeeze life out of them and their beholder. The study found that people who wear boring tend to be very aloof and repressive. They really have no time to try please others and the need to be appear outstanding does not appeal to them. 9. Uncomfortable shoes The biggest irony the study found was that lovers of uncomfortable shoes are actually very calm people. They hardly react to external factors and take their time before acting upon occurrences. Perhaps much of their focus may be tuned to their balancing mechanisms should they stumble upon anything. 10. Street shoes In this category are the flashy Converse, vans and Nike shoes. Lovers of these type of shoes are often young people who dislike the formal look. These people are fashion conscience and move with the trends. They are simple by nature and want to be viewed as 'cool'. The next time someone asks you about your shoes, be sure of the kind you prefer as the question as simple as many imagine.  