Nakuru County is yet to pay suppliers and contractors Sh2.1billion. According to a Medium Term Debt Strategy Paper tabled at the Assembly on Wednesday by Leader of Majority Moses Ndung’u Kamau, the debts are for the period 2013 -2019. DEBTS The debts cut across the regimes of former Governor Kinuthia Mbugua and the current leadership of Governor Lee Kinyanjui. Under the Public Finance Management Act of 2012, the county is required to monitor, evaluate and oversee the management of public finances and economic affairs. The devolved unit is also required to manage its public debt and develop a framework of debt control for the county. The Medium Term Debt Strategy Paper report indicates that as at June 30, 2019, the devolved unit had Sh2.35 billion pending bills. A total of Sh268 million has since been settled in accordance with President Uhuru Kenyatta’s directive that all 47 counties clear their eligible pending bills. The county has also reduced its debt burden by clearing Sh563 million for payment out of the Sh2.08 billion classified as ineligible. PENDING BILLS Out of the 12 departments, Public Service Training and Devolution owes suppliers the highest amount at Sh661million. The department has cleared only Sh27 million. The critical Infrastructure department owes contractors Sh256 million. It has cleared Sh264 million. Health department has a net pending bill of Sh178 million, having settled Sh39 million. The department of Education, Information Communication Technology owes suppliers Sh153 million after clearing Sh24 million, while Lands, Housing and Physical Planning owes suppliers Sh99 million after settling Sh3 million. Trade, Tourism and Cooperatives department owes suppliers Sh72 million after clearing bills worth Sh43 million. Environment, Water and Natural Resources department is still struggling to clean its books of accounts. It has cleared Sh27 million and is yet to clear Sh58 million. Finance and Economic Planning owes suppliers Sh22million, having paid Sh93 million while Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries has settled Sh12 million and is yet to settle Sh15 million to clean its books of accounts. Youth, Gender, Culture, Sports and Social Services has the lowest pending bill at Sh3 million. It has cleared Sh13 million. The Office of the Governor and Deputy Governor has a pending bill of Sh2.8 million, having cleared Sh17.7 million. Only County Public Service Board has cleared all its pending bills of Sh348,000. The fate of some suppliers and contractors hangs in the balance as pending bills worth Sh17 million have been classified as ineligible. INHERITED DEBTS The devolved unit inherited a debt of Sh576million from the four defunct Local Authorities namely; County Council of Nakuru, Municipal Council of Nakuru, Municipal Council of Naivasha and Town Council of Molo. Suppliers and Contractors in the defunct Local Authorities are owed Sh24 million, Nakuru Water and Sanitation Company (Sh248 million), Legal fees (Sh304 million) while a loan at Family Bank has since been cleared. In a bid to manage its debts, the county has gazetted a Pending Bills Committee to guide the procedure for settlement of all outstanding bills. “The current debt levels are within sustainable limits of 10 per cent of the total county revenues,” said the county Finance and Economic Planning executive Peter Ketyenya. Dr Ketyenya said that the county will require Sh600 million in the financial year 2020/2021 to settle debts in the medium term period. However, this is against the allocation of Sh300 million.  