Three suspected robbers are dead after being shot by police following fire exchange at a hotel in Migori County. They were part of a team of six thugs on a mission to execute a robbery plan at Allaxis Hotel on Sunday evening. According to the Directorate of Criminal Investigations (DCI), the robbers found detectives waiting for them at the hotel that is located along Migori-Rongo road. The area DCI officers had gone to the hotel early upon receiving intelligence on the planned robbery. They laid an ambush on the suspected robbers who were on motorcycles. OPENED FIRE According to Migori County Police commander Celestino Nyaga, the robbers raided the hotel at 8:35 pm. “Our detectives laid an ambush and ordered the assailants to surrender but instead they opened fire on police who responded fiercely, gunning down three men,” he said. The other three escaped with gunshot wounds. The three who died were taken to Migori Level Four Hospital mortuary as police seek to identify the bodies and conduct further investigations. A DCI detective was also shot on the right shoulder and is in stable condition while receiving treatment in hospital. One AK 47 Rifle loaded with 16 rounds of ammunition, a torch, a rungu among other items were recovered. Police have since launched a manhunt for the escaped suspects. GROWING INSECURITY Mr Nyaga called on locals to remain vigilant and report any suspicious people to avert future attacks. Migori town and its environs have in the recent past been hit by a spate of violence meted out on locals. Earlier in February, residents of Oruba estate and Masara trading centre in the outskirts of Migori town decried an upsurge of insecurity incidents after machete-wielding gangs reigned terror on locals. Two businessmen were killed in Masara trading centre while a middle-aged woman was hacked as she left her house for work in the wee hours of the morning. Editor's note: An earlier version of this story quoted the DCI which had reported two dead. The Migori County Police commander, however, confirmed that three robbers were killed in the incident.  