The 218,000 teachers and their dependants will not be forced to use fingerprints for identification while seeking treatment, their medical service scheme insurance broker has said. Instead, the teachers and four beneficiaries each will use medical card for identification said AoN Minet Insurance Broker Managing Director Sammy Muthui. Mr Muthui said evidence suggests that coronavirus can remain viable hours, days on a number of materials. REDUCE EXPOSURE “To reduce exposure, we have recommended that hospitals switch from fingerprints to alternative methods [of identifying patients] such as access cards, optical, facial and voice recognition among other options, said Mr Muthui on Tuesday. He added that they had instructed service providers to allow teachers use one time pin (OTP) and cards or e-card for identification in place of fingerprints. He assured teachers that the insurance company will support the government by providing health cover for coronavirus cases. Mr Muthui instructed service providers to put hand washing posters in all common areas of their operation. "We are available to provide updates on ambulatory, hospitals and self-quarantine support through; 0800721316, 0732353535, and 0729471414," said Mr Muthui. Since the outbreak of coronavirus in Kenya, schools closed to contain its spread. The Teachers Service Commission also suspended several programmes that it was to undertake including promotions, recruitment of teachers and handling of discipline cases until further notice. TSC also encouraged teachers to conduct e-learning. Last week, TSC issued guidelines on the Sh9 billion medical scheme for teachers across the country. In a March 12 circular, TSC Chief Executive Officer Nancy Macharia said only those aged between 18 and 65 years, are in active service and one legal spouse are eligible. “Four dependents biological or legally adopted children are eligible for the cover until they are 18 or 25 if still living with their parent(s) and enrolled in a recognised post-secondary institution,” the circular said. MEDICAL COVER In November, Minet Kenya Insurance Brokers won the contract to provide medical cover to teachers. The services offered include inpatient, outpatient, dental, optical, maternity and local and international medical emergency evacuation. The maternity benefits are available to principal members and/or their spouses only. “Medical emergency air and road evacuation allows for emergency transport and transfer of sick or injured members or dependants from the place of incident or facility with inadequate care to the appropriate facility using road ambulance, fixed-wing plane and helicopter within East Africa. Air evacuation is limited to two per family per annum within the policy period,” Mrs Macharia said. FOLLOW: The Coronavirus Tracker  