Prince Charles, the eldest son and heir to Queen Elizabeth II, is showing mild symptoms of Covid-19 but "otherwise remains in good health", his office said Wednesday. The 71-year-old and his wife Camilla - who does not have Covid-19 - are currently self-isolating in Scotland, Clarence House said. "The Prince of Wales has tested positive for Covid-19," it said in a statement, using his official title. "He has been displaying mild symptoms but otherwise remains in good health and has been working from home throughout the last few days as usual. "The Duchess of Cornwall (Camilla) has also been tested but does not have the virus. "In accordance with government and medical advice, the prince and the duchess are now self-isolating at home in Scotland." The couple were tested by the state-run National Health Service in Aberdeenshire in north-east Scotland, it said. "It is not possible to ascertain from whom the prince caught the virus owing to the high number of engagements he carried out in his public role during recent weeks," it added. Queen Elizabeth II, 93, and her husband Prince Philip, 98, retired to Windsor Castle, outside London, on March 19. They brought forward their Easter break by a week because of the coronavirus outbreak. Britain has more than 8,000 confirmed cases of the disease, and 422 people have died. Clarence House said doctors believe Charles became contagious on March 13 -- a day after last meeting his mother. The 93-year-old queen has been staying with her 98-year-old husband Prince Philip at Windsor Castle, 820 kilometres south of Balmoral, since March 19. Given their age -- and Prince Philip's stay in hospital at Christmas -- the prince's diagnosis prompted questions about their potential exposure to the virus. But a Buckingham Palace spokeswoman said: "Her Majesty the Queen remains in good health. "The Queen last saw the Prince of Wales briefly after the investiture on the morning of March 12, and is following all the appropriate advice with regards to her welfare." She would not say whether the queen had been tested for coronavirus when contacted by AFP.  