The eagerly awaited supplementary budget by Governor Lee Kinyanjui to mitigate against the effects of coronavirus pandemic is expected to generate hot debate at the Nakuru County Assembly.The estimates will be tabled in the House on Thursday next week. When the House reconvened on Tuesday, there were all indications that it will not be a smooth sailing. SH250 MILLION Moments after Leader of Majority Moses Ndung’u Kamau (Elementaita) moved a motion to debate the impact of the Covid-19 on Nakuru residents, there was a heated debate on the county preparedness. “We must allocate enough resources in the supplementary budget to cushion the residents against the effects of Covid-19 as there is a likelihood of a lockdown,” said Mr Ndung’u. Governor Kinyanjui administration is planning to spend Sh250 million on food and equipment to mitigate against the effects of the virus. Lake View Ward MCA Karanja Mburu faulted the assembly and Executive for handling the pandemic casually.“This matter was first reported on March 13 and I expected the Leader of the Majority to table a report on what the county is doing to address it but he has tabled a World Health Organization (WHO) report,” said Mr Karanja. PROTECTIVE GEAR “Are we waiting for our people to die so that we can act? Health workers lack protective gear and we should come up with tangible solutions and stop this sugar coating public relations exercise,” said Mr Mburu. The MCA, who is also the chairperson of the Disaster Committee, said the shifting of markets in Naivasha was done haphazardly without consultation. He said the new market lacks basic sanitation facilities. “It seems the executive and the assembly are not working as a team to fight this [Covid-19] pandemic,” added Mr Mburu. Mariashoni MCA Douglas Ayabei said the move by the executive to decongest the town by relocating markets and matatu terminus was a timely move to address the social distancing guidelines. Kiamaina MCA Wahome Jambo Kenya and his Dundori counterpart Michael Chege Machembu called on the devolved unit to support community health volunteers if it hopes to beat the virus. “Community health workers are in the frontline giving civic education to the residents and [they] should be motivated by a small stipend in the supplementary budget,” said Mr Wahome.He called on water providers to ensure there is a steady supply of the commodity. MONITOR DONATIONSHe appealed to the county to extend the grace period to pay for licences since businesses have been affected. Gilgil MCA Jane Wangui Ngugi called for the formation of a consultative local committee in the ward to coordinate the fight against coronavirus. Maiella MCA Joseph Gathariki said the assembly should oversight all the donations to ensure they are put to proper use. “We have hungry tigers in the county who might take advantage of the crisis to benefit from this crisis,” said Mr Gathariki. Other MCAs who supported the motion include Mary Waiganjo (Subukia), Eddy Kiragu (Flamingo), Erick Gichuki (Viwandani), Cecilia Nyambura (Visoi), Peter Mbae (Kabazi), Irene Chebichi (Soin), George Kiere (Kihingo), Melvin Kutol (Solai), Stephen Ng’ethe (Maai Mahiu), Peter Njuguna (Elburgon), Philip Rotich (Mauche), Grace Mwathi, Rose Gathoni, Isabella Makori (nominated).  