Nairobi residents will today (Wednesday) give their views about the functions taken over by the national government through public participation forums in all the 17 sub-counties. The forums will be facilitated by the Devolution and Asal ministry and will run from morning till 1pm at various centres in the sub-counties. “The Nairobi City County Assembly is [in agreement] and partners with the Ministry of Devolution to invite residents of Nairobi City County and all members of the public to submit their views and comments on the Deed of Transfer of Functions to the Cabinet Secretary,” read a notice in one of the local dailies. AGREEMENT Some of the functions which were taken over by the national government after Governor Mike Sonko and Cabinet Secretary Eugene Wamalwa signed an agreement in the presence of President Uhuru Kenyatta are Health, Transport, Public Works and Planning. Residents of Dagoretti North and Dagoretti South will be detailed on the takeover and given a chance to air their views at Muslim Primary School and Waithaka Social Hall respectively. EMBAKASI Residents of Embakasi Central, North and South will air their views at Kayole II Social Hall, Dandora III Social Hall, Mukuru Health Centre and Imara Daima respectively. Those in Embakasi East and West are urged to turn up at Embakasi Social Hall and sub-county administration grounds in Umoja I. Residents of Kasarani will congregate at Maji Mazuri. KAMUKUNJI Kamukunji residents will gather at Eastleigh North Social Hall, those in Lang'ata at Karen Social Hall while Mathare residents will be at Undugu Social Hall. Kibra and Westlands sub-counties will hold the public forums at Joseph Kang'ethe Social Hall, Woodley Grounds and Parklands Day Nursery School respectively. Residents of Starehe Constituency, which extends to the city centre, will give their views at Kariokor Social Hall. The Devolution CS will officially launch the sessions at the Kenya School of Government, then visit other venues in the sub-counties.  