The Health ministry has raised the alarm over a surge in community transmissions as the number of Covid-19 cases rose to 320. Community transmission means a patient had no known contact with another confirmed case or travelled from a country badly affected by the pandemic. Dr Mercy Mwangangi, the chief administrative secretary (CAS) in the ministry, said of the 17 people who tested positive; 15 were picked up by the surveillance team while only two came from quarantine centres. “This evidence coming in shows local transmission has been established,” she said. Dr Mwangangi said Mombasa County accounted for 12 of the cases and Nairobi five, indicating that more community transmissions are coming out of the coastal city. Dr Allan Pamba, a public health specialist and Nairobi Hospital chief executive, said community transmission means members of the community infected with Covid-19 who have not been tagged as infected are circulating and mingling within the community. “That is when the risk of a surge comes to play,” he said.   PUBLIC ENGAGEMENT Dr Pamba said all the things Kenya is doing now are aimed at reducing community transmissions. These include basics such as frequent hand sanitisation, social distancing and wearing of masks in public spaces. “My worry is that these measures seem to be working — reflected in our relatively low new case rates reported — but is gradually leading to public complacency and pressure to resume normalcy. That is how our surge will come,” he said. Dr Pamba said there needs to be sustained public engagement by the government and other stakeholders to explain why these measures need to be taken seriously. “We all need to be generous and reflect how we financially shield the most vulnerable in our communities even as we expect them to comply with these measures. This is how we reduce our collective risk,” he said. Dr Mwangangi said the National Emergency Response Committee (NERC) — led by Health Cabinet Secretary Mutahi Kagwe — will this weekend assess whether the measures taken by the government to contain the spread of the virus are working. She added that NERC will then communicate further measures to contain the virus spread. MASS TESTING Dr Mwangangi also addressed the matter of stigma, saying contracting the coronavirus is not a crime. “We want to make it clear today that contracting coronavirus is not a crime. All of us have a potential risk of contracting the disease. That is why we have come up with measures and guidelines to ensure we all can avoid contracting the disease,” she said. The ministry further reported that the number of recoveries in Kenya has risen to 89 as six more patients were discharged after testing negative for the disease. The government has announced plans for targeted widespread testing, with a target of 250,000 tests to be done by the end of June. The Coronavirus Tracker  