Corporates under the Kenya chapter of the National Business Compact Coalition have raised more than Sh70 million as to support the government’s efforts to fight the coronavirus pandemic. The donation, both cash and in-kind, was by Reckitt and Benckiser, PZ Cussons, Live Ad, Unilever, Menengai, Copia, Rotary International, Johnson and Johnson, Swiss Development Cooperation (SDC), Twiga, Chandaria and Microsoft. Edward Oswe, the chief executive officer of Marketing Society of Kenya (MSK), which convened the coalition said that as these organisations continue to donate funds, talent, flight time on media channels, agile working software, products such as soap and sanitisers among other in-kind support, more corporates should join the cause. “More organisations should come on board with in-kind and financial support for the initiative which will go a long way in enabling the business community play its role," he said. "Flexible Fund has been established, and is led by Amref with oversight from the Kenya Red Cross Society, the UN SDG Partnership Platform, Kenya Association of Manufacturers and the MSK, to receive and oversee the rapid response to urgent government requests." EDUCATION MSK chairman Pheodor Njoroge noted that the Ministry of Health’s focus is to collaborate with the Kenya Business Compact to win the fight against Covid-19. As such, Mr Njoroge said, promoting and educating Kenyans in applying good health practices is a key government strategy towards ensuring the public is safe. He noted that with the uncertainty which the Covid-19 brings Kenya and the rest of the world, there is no better way to sensitise the public about the lifesaving practices of handwashing through brands whose business it is to promote basic hygiene. “Through their marketing practices and collective thought process on the agenda, we believe the initiative will have an impact and will play a valuable role in helping the country to remain safe during the pandemic," he said. "The Kenya Business Compact is working closely with renowned hand-washing expert Myriam Sidibe who continues to voice the need and urgent local action to fight this global pandemic." UNITED FRONT Ms Sidibe believes the business community must stand up immediately and commit to responsible marketing practices and support efforts to accelerate national handwashing campaigns and other preventative solutions. Mr Oswe, even so, reiterated their appeal to local and international organisations in Kenya to come on board, donate and contribute towards the fight to contain and stop the pandemic. The National Business Compact was convened by the MSK and launched on March 16 by the Ministry of Health to mobilise action and the support of corporates in countering the pandemic. It comprises brands in the hygiene business, the Kenya Association of Manufacturers, Kenya Private Sector Alliance, Public Relations Society of Kenya, Amref, SDG Partnership Platform and the United Nations family in Kenya. Its mandate is to accelerate local action and support government efforts in countering the contagion. CONTACTS Organisations willing to donate may reach the National Business Compact via email address info@covid19businessresponse.ke or phone number 0110 012 725. They can also contact the Marketing Society of Kenya using email address info@msk.co.ke or mobile number 0792,001,391. The Paybill number for contributions is 344555 – National Business Compact Fund  