University of Nairobi has formed a senate ad hoc committee to streamline online leaning at the institution amid the coronavirus outbreak. Vice-chancellor Prof Stephen Kiama said the committee will be chaired by Prof Mohamed Jama and will seek to review applicable regulatory framework and propose ways of ensuring the actions and procedures are in conformity with the relevant laws. Prof Kiama issued the statement after chairing a senate meeting which approved rollout of online teaching at the university. “All faculties, schools, institutes and centres launched online learning for both undergraduates and postgraduates students albeit with staggered semester schedules. The principals of colleges to facilitate the progress and ensure conformity with applicable regulations,” said Prof Kiama. The VC said examination of postgraduate thesis, projects and dissertations will be done online since the senate approved procedures and protocol  for conducting such examinations. He added that admission of new students using online platforms will continue while faculty will be facilitated to access their research grants to conduct their research activities. “Library e-resource will be made available to students and faculty online from their remote locations. Further, all students shall be assigned UoN email domain to facilitate their access,” said Prof Kiama. On the pandemic, he said the university lecturers are working with the government and giving advice as well as educating Kenyans through various media platforms. “Faculty at the college of health sciences and postgraduate students in Kenyatta National hospital have continued to offer services at KNH and in other hospitals in Kenya,” said Prof Kiama. He added that University of Nairobi School of law in liaison with the Kenya law reforms commission (KLRC) and the attorney general  office are   working with the government to draft the Covid-19 Bill. “University researchers are also writing proposals for research grants and partnerships required for arresting Covid-19,” added the VC.  