The coronavirus death toll in the United States climbed by 1,891 in the past 24 hours to reach 38,664 on Saturday, according to a tally by Johns Hopkins University. The US has seen a total of 732,197 confirmed cases of Covid-19 since the start of the global health crisis, according to the Baltimore-based university. It is the highest number of virus cases and deaths of any country in the world. Also Saturday, coronavirus deaths surged past 100,000 in Europe, accounting for nearly two-thirds of the 157,539 fatalities worldwide. PROTESTS Hundreds protested Saturday in cities across America against coronavirus-related lockdowns -- with encouragement from President Donald Trump -- as resentment grows against the crippling economic cost of confinement. An estimated 400 people gathered under a cold rain in Concord, New Hampshire -- many on foot while others remained in their cars -- to send a message that extended quarantines were not necessary in a state with relatively few confirmed cases of Covid-19. The crowd included several armed men wearing military-style uniforms, with their faces covered. In Texas, more than 250 people rallied outside the State Capitol in Austin, including far-right conspiracy theorist Alex Jones, founder of the Infowars site, who rolled up in a tank-like truck. "It's time to reopen Texas, it's time to let people work, it's time for them to let voluntary interaction and good sense rule the day, not government force," said Justin Greiss, an activist with Young Americans for Liberty. Stay-at-home mother Amira Abuzeid added: "I'm not a doctor but I'm an intelligent person who can do math and it looks like at the end of the day, these numbers are not that worrisome." Few if any observed social distancing recommendations. Demonstrators outside Maryland's colonial-era statehouse in Annapolis stayed in their cars but waved signs with messages like "Poverty kills too." Dolores, a hairdresser, told AFP she is not eligible for unemployment because she is a business owner, not an employee. "I need to save my business. I need to work to live. Otherwise I will die," she said. Other demonstrations took place across the country in cities such as Columbus, Ohio and San Diego, California, as well as the states of Indiana, Nevada and Wisconsin. Few practiced social distancing but many of the protesters waved American flags. Protesters have drawn encouragement in certain Democratic-led states from tweets by Trump, who has said he favours a quick return to normal, though protests have also taken place in Republican-led states like New Hampshire and Texas. The vast majority of Americans are under lockdown orders restricting public movement and keeping all but essential businesses closed. In Concord, demonstrators carried signs with slogans like "The numbers lie" and "Reopen New Hampshire." Their common demand was that the stay-at-home order for the state of 1.3 million people be called off before its scheduled May 4 end date. Others, amid a sea of American flags, chanted the state's Revolutionary War-era slogan, "Live Free or Die." "People are very happy on a voluntary basis to do what's necessary," one demonstrator, 63-year-old Skip Murphy, told AFP by phone. He added, however, that "the data does not support the egregious lockdown we are having in New Hampshire." As of early Friday, New Hampshire had reported 1,287 confirmed coronavirus cases and 37 deaths. Tracking coronavirus  