Governor Muthomi Njuki and his deputy Nyamu Kagwima have voluntarily taken a 30 per cent pay cut for the next three months as a way of contributing to the fight against the Covid-19 pandemic. Announcing the decision, Mr Njuki also revealed that all county executive committee members had also agreed to part with 20 per cent of their salaries. The money will be deposited in a special bank account to be used only in the fight against the disease. The governor appealed to well-wishers to donate either money or services. “The money will be audited by the Auditor-General to ensure transparency and accountability,” he said. He added that the county had only Sh10 million for the Covid-19 emergency fund against an estimated need of Sh78 million. On preparedness, he said the county had enough protective gear and had trained 103 health workers on handling patients. He said the devolved unit had distributed handwashing equipment to 65,534 households and installed 50 fabricated handwashing machines in towns and hospitals. The county boss said six motorcycles had been bought to facilitate surveillance and an ambulance dedicated to transporting only Covid-19 patients. He said the county government, in line with a Ministry of Health directive, had identified schools and churches in every sub-county that would be used as isolation centres if the number of patients shoots up. He said there are only 48 Covid-19 isolation beds - 30 in four main county public hospitals and 18 in private facilities. “Even if we admit only Covid-19 patients, our hospitals are likely to be overwhelmed because both the public and private have a bed capacity of 550 beds,” he said. Mr Njuki urged the national government to consider establishing Covid-19 testing centres in counties. He said boda-boda operators and their customers will be required to always wear face masks and all travellers coming into the county from other places will be screened. He directed the Nithi Water and Sanitation Company not to disconnect water for clients with pending bills. He also asked revenue officers to allow free movement of food items. He said legal action will be taken against anyone found peddling lies or unconfirmed information on social media about the pandemic. He said not a single person in the county had tested positive for the disease. “We urge our people to obey the curfew order and strictly follow the health guidelines so that we can remain safe,” he said.  