The Ethics and Anti- Corruption Commission (EACC) has warned governors against misusing funds meant for the Covid-19 mitigation measures. Those who supply substandard goods will also not be spared, EACC has further warned. Speaking when he donated Sh1.2 million from EACC commissioners and staff to the Covid-19 emergency response fund board, EACC Chief Executive Officer Twalib Mbarak noted that it is during times of emergencies that money is misused for selfish gain. PROCUREMENT RULES “This is a message to the county governors and others involved that we are monitoring how the fund is going to be spent. They should not take advantage of procurement under the guise of this emergency to enrich themselves as opposed to the intended beneficiaries because we will get them very easily,” Mr Mbarak said. He was speaking Tuesday spoke at the Kenyatta International Convention Centre (KICC). Ms Jane Karuku, who chairs the fund board, received the EACC donation. Also present was EACC Vice-Chairperson Sophia Lepuchirit. “EACC remains steadfast in the discharge of its mandate and will not hesitate to take action on those found culpable of abusing the ethics and integrity requirements,” said EACC Chairman Eliud Wabukala in a statement read on his behalf by Ms Lepuchirit. ACCOUNT FOR EVERY PENNY The EACC CEO said that the governors must be ready to account for every penny they spend in the Covid-19 response measures and that all procurement laws and regulations must be adhered to. “As a commission, we are alive to the emergencies posed by this pandemic but I want to be categorical that procurement rules must be followed to the letter,” Mr Twalib said. The anti-graft agency is already investigating officials of the Bungoma County government for misuse of funds meant to deal with the spread of the pandemic. “Shortcuts in procurement will not be tolerated by this commission at a time when the government has reorganised its budget including suspending its key development projects like the big four so that it can get funds to deal with the pandemic,” said Mr Twalib. SH1.3 BILLION COLLECTED Ms Karuku noted that the fund, a private sector initiative set up by President Uhuru Kenyatta a month ago to collect donations from well-wishers to deal with the pandemic, has so far received Sh1.3 billion in cash and kind. According to Ms Karuku, the fund will start spending the money collected this week. Diamond Trust Bank (DTB) Managing Director and Group CEO Nasim Devji said it will channel Sh50 million directly to the fund for provision of relief for vulnerable families. Ms Devji said the bank will use another Sh50 million for its own initiatives in the fight against the virus. DTB is supporting the provision of meals to frontline workers at Kenyatta National Hospital and the Mbagathi Hospital isolation facility in collaboration with the Nairobi Serena Hotel. The bank is also financing the set up of 40 beds at the Field Hospital by the Aga Khan University Hospital, Nairobi. “We are here to support Kenyans. We will continue to do so from the bottom of our hearts as the DTB family,” said Ms Devji. Board Chairman Linus Gitahi said the bank is keen on minimising the economic impact of the pandemic. “We all have a role to play as we are in this together. We stand with fellow Kenyans and the government and are playing our part in ensuring the most vulnerable members of society are supported," he said.  