Football Kenya Federation (FKF) President Nick Mwendwa has confirmed Gor Mahia are the 2019/20 Kenyan Premier League champions. KPL suspended the league indefinitely to conform to government directives to fight the spread of coronavirus and with the extension of the tight regulations such as the ban on use of all public sporting facilities, night curfew, and inter-county travel, it was clear the season would not end on May 8 as initially planned. KPL CEO Jack Oguda Monday confirmed the league remains suspended indefinitely but on Thursday Mwendwa took to Twitter to confirm the league will not resume. FKF argues that according to the rules governing Kenyan football, 68 percent of matches have been played and therefore K'Ogalo are the champions. "Congratulations Gor Mahia! You are champions once again and you will represent Kenya on the champions league Next season. Lets do this !" Mwendwa tweeted. While it is still unclear how relegation from the two top leagues will be effected, Mwendwa also confirmed National Super League leaders Nairobi City Stars have also been promoted to the top-tier. KPL has, however, disagreed with FKF’s decision to prematurely end the league and have responded in a strongly-worded statement to the federation. “It is still too early to consider the effects of the Covid-19 pandemic on Kenyan football as case of force majeure. If in any case it were so, KPL would stand to be guided by Clause 9.1 of the FKF-KPL Agreement which provides direction on our obligations in the event of a force majeure. Ending the league can only be considered as a solution if there has been such a directive from Caf to all its members for the Leagues to end by a certain date. Since Caf has not concluded its own club competitions it therefore makes no sense at all to insinuate that Caf is rushing its members to end their seasons. Should such a directive come from Caf, KPL will exercise its mandate to give the way forward to FKF on the fate of the league after convening a Governing Council meeting,” read the statement in part. KPL has also warned FKF against interfering with the running of the topflight league as per the agreement by the two bodies.    