Kenya on Saturday recorded its highest number of coronavirus infections in a single day, raising the total number of confirmed cases since March 13 to 435. Health Chief Administrative Secretary Mercy Mwangangi (CAS) announced 24 new cases of Covid-19 following the testing of 1,195 samples in the last 24 hours. Dr Mwangangi noted that seven of these cases were recorded in Kawangware, Nairobi, whose count increased to 20, following mass testing that began on Friday. The ministry said 12 of Kawangware's cases were traced to one person who used to work at an emergency care centre. She said 10 of the new patients were from Eastleigh in Nairobi, whose total number of cases rose to 21, five from Mombasa and two from Kuria West in Migori County. In Mombasa, the total number of confirmed cases rose to 129, with two of the new cases being from Mikindani, another two from Mwembe Tayari and one from Shimanzi Migori's patients had a history of travel to Tanzania, which had 480 cases and 16 deaths as of May 2. DEATH TOLL The CAS also announced that one more person had died in Mombasa, raising the country's death toll to 22. The 51-year-old woman was admitted on April 27 and had a pre-existing condition. The ministry further reported that two more patients had been discharged, raising the total number of recoveries to 152. Ten of the 24 new patients were male and 14 female. In terms of age, CAS Mwangangi said four of the new patients were aged 1 to 19 years, 14 were aged 20 to 39 years and six between 40 and 60 years. She said 214 patients were in isolation, with only one in a critical state. DANGEROUS TRENDS The shocking numbers came a day after the ministry started targeted mass testing in places that had been mapped out as hotspots in Nairobi, namely Kibera and Kawangware. The ministry warned that with this kind of testing, the figures would increase dramatically. While warning that the disease was spreading quickly among communities, the ministry asked Kenyans to take seriously all the measures the government has put in place. CAS Mwangangi said random checks revealed that many people were not wearing their face masks properly and were not observing social distancing yet this remains a key measure against the spread of the coronavirus. She also said the ministry was worried about a return to high human and vehicle traffic, especially in the Nairobi central business district, and that employees were increasingly returning to work despite the government's appeal for them to work from home. Among the measures the government has taken are a ban of movement into and out of Nairobi, Mombasa, Mandera, Kilifi and Kwale counties, as well as Dadaab and Kakuma camps. “If we do not adhere to containment measures, the disease is bound to spread faster,” the CAS said, adding the ministry was looking into a system that would allow quarantining at home due to the large numbers of patients. “The ministry will be issuing specific guidelines on this in due course,” she said. MASS TESTING There had been calls for the government to ramp up its testing capacity to give a clear picture of how pervasive the virus is in the counties. Scientists said that this information was needed to be able to judge when the economy would be opened. The ministry responded by starting the mass testing as well as the testing of truck drivers was due to the weak links that the country has had. But this too was slowed down due to a lack of testing kits and media for transporting the viruses collected from the field to the laboratories.   MEDICINES Health Director-General Patrick Amoth said the ministry was considering a new drug – Remdesivir - which is being used in the United States in small percentages. Dr Amoth also said that the ministry would continue its pursuit for other drugs used in other countries. Remdesivir is an antiviral drug designed to treat both hepatitis and a common respiratory virus. It got an emergency approval from the Food and Drug Administration (FDA. The ministry is also considering hydroxychloroquine, a derivative of the antimalarial chloroquine generally thought to have less severe side effects. Dr Amoth, however, said they were not overly enthusiastic in trying the treatments because majority of Covid-19 cases in Kenya have been mild. Dr Amoth reported that the Jack Ma Foundation has sent Kenya another consignment of about 17,000 test kits, 2,900 virus transporting media and more than 1,000 personal protective equipment that have since been distributed. He cautioned Kenyans against assuming that the number of kits equalled that of tests to be done. “Each person needs three kits for testing so that we are sure about the results given,” Dr Amoth said. RAPID TESTS He observed the ministry was hesitant in employing the use of the rapid tests, which would yield quicker results than the PCR that is now being used. Many commercial tests for coronavirus antibodies have been brought to Kenya for validation by the Pharmacy and Poisons Board (PPB). These tests show whether someone's immune system has encountered the virus. However, Dr Amoth said that there were reservations in using them for making clinical decisions on whether someone should be put in the ward because the tests are not able to distinguish between SARS CoV-2 and the other four coronaviruses that cause mild flu. He explained: “It will read all of them as positive.” Dr Amoth explained further that people whose immunities are compromised by diseases such as tuberculosis and HIV may not react by producing sufficient antibodies that can be detected by the test kits, and so would be read as negative even when they are positive. There will be some use for the kits though. “We will use them for serosurveillance, a survey done to know how far the virus has spread in the community,” he said. STATISTICS In Africa, the coronavirus had infected at least 41,677 and killed over 1,697, according to case tracker Worldometer's count on May 2. Since the first case was reported in Wuhan, China, on December 31, 2019, at least 3,417,903 people worldwide had been infected by May 2. The total number of deaths worldwide was 239,920 and that of recoveries at 1,089,192. The number of active cases stood at 2,088,791, with two per cent or 51,217 of them being critical and the rest mild, a figure lower than April 30's. Worldometer's count showed that the number of closed cases was 1,329,112, with 82 per cent or 1,089,192 being the number of recoveries or those discharged. The Coronavirus Tracker  