Like the simple life he led during his six-decade church ministry, Archbishop Raphael Simon Ndingi Mwana a’ Nzeki was given a quiet send-off at the Holy Family Basilica, Nairobi yesterday. No politician spoke at the ceremony that lasted less than two hours. Ndingi was buried in a crypt — a stone chamber beneath the floor of the church — at a special place reserved for bishops. Also at the site is the body of Archbishop John Njenga, who died late 2018. The burial was devoid of pomp and colour. The brown coffin was not bedecked with flowers. Instead, a white cloth and a wooden cross were in front of the casket as a white candle with a sign of the cross burned near it during the entire ceremony. The Mass, attended by fewer than 100 people, started at 10.15am and was broadcast live on TV. The invited priests, nuns and bishops had face masks and observed social distancing to prevent coronavirus spread. Archbishop Ndingi, who was 89 at the time of his death on March 31, was praised by the speakers for fighting for truth and justice. He was also described as a firebrand preacher, who openly criticised the excesses of the Kanu regime and defended the oppressed. The eulogy, read by Fr Lawrence Njoroge, described Ndingi as a generous priest with many gifts. According to the tribute, Ndingi was kind, stubborn, a firebrand, and deeply spiritual. In his message conveyed by Principal Administrative Secretary Kennedy Kihara, President Kenyatta said the country and the Catholic Church have lost a great leader. Permanent solution Mr Kenyatta asked Kenyans to emulate Archbishop Ndingi and practise what he preached. “His life is [a] demonstration that in the world of difficulties and challenges, there are people who...rise to serve God,” the President said. Mr Kenyatta added that he would set aside a day the life of Archbishop Ndingi would be celebrated when the coronavirus pandemic is finally contained. Auxiliary Bishop of Nairobi Archdiocese David Kamau said Ndingi stood against oppression. “He was not compromised to be silent on the ills affecting the people. Archbishop Ndingi raised his humble voice and opposed those in political positions when they were wrong,” Bishop Kamau, who is also the assistant of Cardinal John Njue, said. “Archbishop Ndingi fought for the persecuted and the poor. To be good leaders that the world is asking for, let us emulate him.” Fr Lawrence Njoroge, the chaplain of Jomo Kenyatta University of Agriculture Technology, echoed Bishop Kamau. He recalled a case in 1999 when many parts of Kenya faced drought. Fr Njoroge said Archbishop Ndingi and the Nation Media Group launched and championed a programme focused on taking relief food and basic items to hungry Kenyans. He said Ndingi sought to find a permanent solution to the problem. DN body text: “He fought for justice. It is for this reason that in 1996, St John Fisher College — his alma mater — awarded him a doctorate of law [honoris causa],” Fr Njoroge said. “He was also honoured with the Elder of the Order of the Burning Spear by the Republic of Kenya in recognition of his enormous contribution to national service.” Cardinal Njue said many Catholic bishops did not attend the ceremony due to the strict measures put in place by the Ministry of Health to combat coronavirus. He added that the death of Archbishop Ndingi “is a good moment of renewal and examination”. “We need to prepare so that when our time comes, we shall remain in communion with God,” the Cardinal told the gathering. “God in your wisdom called your servant Raphael Ndingi Mwana a’ Nzeki out of this world by releasing him from the bond of sins.” “Welcome him into your presence so he that he may enjoy eternal life and peace and be raised in glory with saints.” Several leaders and government officials attended the ceremony. They included Chief Justice David Maraga, Wiper party leader Kalonzo Musyoka, his Ford Kenya counterpart Moses Wetang’ula, Kiminini MP Chris Wamalwa, CBK boss Patrick Njoroge and Devolution CS Eugene Wamalwa.  