The Health ministry has announced eight more positive cases of the coronavirus in Kenya, raising the total number from 208 to 216 within 24 hours. Dr Mercy Mwangangi, the Chief Administrative Secretary (CAS) in the department, reported this in the daily update on Tuesday, saying five of the new patients were Kenyans and three foreign nationals. Dr Mwangangi said the patients had histories of travel to Zambia, the United Kingdom, the United Arab Emirates, Comoros and Pakistan. Six of the new cases were reported in Nairobi, one in Siaya and another in Nakuru after the analysis of 649 samples. "Six of the cases emanated from our mandatory quarantine centres while two were picked by our surveillance teams," the CAS said. She said one more person recovered and was discharged from hospital, raising the total number of recoveries to 41. MASS TESTING While noting an increase in local transmission, CAS Mwangangi said mass testing would be a priority and would see about 12,000 testing kits distributed across the country. She said priority areas would include quarantine centers, hotels, isolation facilities, hospitals and high population density areas such as Kibra in Nairobi, as well as parts of Mandera and Siaya counties. Dr Mwangangi said the mass testing would see 1,000 of the tests kits sent to the Kenya Ports Authority (KPA) in Mombasa County and the same number to Mandera and Siaya. DISTRIBUTION While listing the counties affected by the virus so far and the number of cases reported in each, the CAS asked the public to adhere to directives by the government on containing the spread. "We have appraised you constantly on our figures and advised you that it would be much wiser to prepare for the worst," she told the public. "Despite the measures we have put in place, we are witnessing a phenomenon where the virus is increasingly moving to the counties. The virus is now domiciled across the length and breadth of our republic, from down south in Kilifi to Mandera in the North and and from the West in Vihiga to Kitui in the East. Out of the 216 cases, Dr Mwangangi said, Nairobi accounted for 101, Mombasa 34, Kilifi 10, Kiambu seven and Mandera and Machakos six each. Nakuru accounted for five while Kitui, Laikipia, Kajiado, Murang'a, Kakamega, Nyandarua, Siaya and Uasin Gishu had two each. Kisii, Homa Bay, Nyamira, Nyeri, Vihiga and Kwale had one each. In terms of age distribution, five of the positive cases were aged 14 and below, 58 were in the 15-29 age group, 138 in the 30-59 age group and 16 above age 60. The CAS said a total of 2,331 contacts had been monitored and 1,729 discharged, leaving 602 under follow-up. RELATED ISSUES The ministry noted that cases of domestic violence, gender-based violence and sexual offences by close relatives and guardians had increased. It said it had received reports from the Gender Violence Recovery Centre (GVRC) and the National Council on Administration of Justice (NCAJ). As such, Dr Mwangangi asked the public to "focus on fighting the virus and handle disputes within the civil structures and devoid of violence". "We remind everyone that the law has not been suspended, and that it will catch up with those who mete violence on others during this period," she said. US DEATHS Earlier on Tuesday, the Foreign Affairs ministry said five Kenyans died of the coronavirus in the US in the last month while hundreds of others are stuck in various countries that have imposed lockdowns. Foreign Affairs Principal Secretary Macharia Kamau said on Tuesday that the five victims had underlying medical conditions that worsened their conditions, leading to their deaths. Mr Kamau said an estimated 160 Kenyans who had travelled to India with their relatives to seek treatment are currently stuck in that country. On China, PS Kamau said close to 3,000 Kenyans are there but that no deaths had been reported. The PS further said that there are two suspected deaths of Kenyans in Sweden. He also reported a recovery in Rwanda and another in Qatar. THE NUMBERS According to Worldometer's tally, 1,934,557 cases of the coronavirus had been reported globally as at April 14. The total number of deaths was 120,438 and that of recoveries 456,736. The number of active cases stood at 1,357,383 while closed cases numbered 577,174.  