The political onslaught targeting Deputy President William Ruto continued to escalate after 12 lawmakers allied to President Uhuru Kenyatta and Orange Democratic Movement (ODM) party leader Raila Odinga told him to resign for undermining the President and opposing government initiatives. The Members of Parliament also told Dr Ruto to stop hiding behind the Building Bridges Initiative report and instead face the President concerning the woes facing Jubilee Party. The MPs, while addressing the press at Parliament Buildings Monday, said DP Ruto is rebelling against the BBI report -- which has the blessings of President Kenyatta -- and is using Mr Odinga as a scapegoat for his opposition to the document. Led by National Assembly Minority Whip Junet Mohamed, the MPs said the remarks by Dr Ruto that the BBI consultative meetings are a waste of public resources is a direct affront to President Kenyatta. WASTAGE OF FUNDS Mr Mohamed was accompanied by nominated MP Maina Kamanda, Sabina Chege (Murang’a), Ben Momanyi (Borabu), Simba Arati (Dagoretti North), Imran Okoth (Kibra), Peter Kaluma (Homa Bay), TJ Kajwang’ (Ruaraka), Tim Wanyonyi (Westlands) and Anthony Oluoch (Mathare). “We want to remind Kenyans that DP Ruto is a known divisive and negative person with a very dark past. He is the only Deputy President in the history of our republic who has been indicted for stealing a poor person’s land,” said Mr Mohamed, who read the statement on behalf of the MPs. The MPs also dismissed claims by the pro-Ruto Tangatanga brigade that the BBI consultative meetings will cost taxpayers a whooping Sh10 billion, saying this was propaganda meant to whip up public emotions against the process. On Friday in Vihiga County, the DP dismissed the BBI forums, which are set to be held countrywide, saying they are only meant to misuse public funds as nobody is opposed to the report. BBI RALLIES The first meeting was held in Kisii County on January 10 and the next one will be in Kakamega County on Saturday, January 18. Ms Chege told off those criticising the consultative meetings, saying there is nothing wrong in leaders going to the grassroots to enlighten people on the contents of the BBI report. In Nyeri, Gatanga MP Nduati Ngugi and Nyeri’s Ngunjiri Wambugu accused the DP of allowing his political allies to disparage President Kenyatta's leadership. Additional reporting by Ndungu Gachane and Joseph Wangui  