The migratory Osprey bird, which flew more than 6,000 kilometres from Finland to Kenya last Thursday, has died. The bird was fished out of the waters of Lake Kanyaboli after flying 6,948 kilometres and landing at Usalu Village in West Yimbo Location of Bondo Sub-county in Siaya County. After one Mr Walter Oloo reported the sighting at the office of Kenya Wildlife Service (KWS) in Siaya, the bird was taken to the KWS Veterinary Department in Nairobi and later moved to the Raptor Rehabilitation Centre in Karen. In a statement on Monday, KWS communication Director, Mr Paul Udoto, said the fish-eating bird died on Sunday. "We regret to announce the death of the bird despite all efforts to rehabilitate and eventually release it back to the wild," he said, noting it was in the care of KWS veterinarians at the time. "We were feeding and treating it back to good health with a plan to release it back at the exact site where it was rescued in the Lake Victoria catchment so it would not lose it's bearing on the epic return flight northwards early in March." POSTMORTEM Mr Udoto said the bird was weak, had been severely dehydrated and emaciated from the long flight by the time it was being transferred to Nairobi. He also said it suffered minor injuries while trapped by the fishing net. "It weighed 950g against the normal range of 1.3 or 1.8 kg of an adult Osprey," he said Mr Udodo said a postmortem found the bird died due to systematic organ failure as a result of long term starvation. THE RESCUE The Osprey, scientifically known as pandion haliaetus, is also referred to as a sea hawk or a river hawk. Nature Kenya and the Yala Ecosystem Site Support Group (YESSG) were behind the bird's rescue. The YESSG, through chairman Mr Ayiro Lwala of Yimbo Usenge wrote about the discovery on the group's page after getting in touch with the rescuer. A tag on the bird's leg showed it was ringed in Finland at the Museum Zool, Helsinki . KWS said Finland informed it that the bird was was ringed in June 2017 and that it was mature enough for breeding.  