A section of Rift Valley elders have cautioned Deputy President William Ruto to watch out ‘political cons’ who are pretending to back his 2022 presidential bid, but their only aim is enrich themselves financially. Rift Valley Council of Elders led by their patron Gilbert Kabage, on Friday claimed that some political brokers have been visiting Ruto at his homes in Sugoi, Uasin Gishu and Karen in Nairobi in the recent past. “The deputy president should beware of political brokers and cons trooping to meet him just to get cash. Most of these leaders do not have his best interests at heart, they are only keen on enriching themselves and will derail his political ambitions, “said Mr Kabage. The elders further said that the political brokers are misleading Ruto and will negatively impact his 2022 presidential ambitions. “The deputy president must be wary of such characters, who will jump ship, after meeting their financial or political needs. Majority of them are just masquerading and have nothing to add to his presidential bid,” added Mr Kabage. The elders made the remarks less than a month after Bahati MP  Kimani Ngunjiri led a delegation of Kikuyu leaders drawn mainly from Nakuru , Nyandarua and Laikipia Counties to DP Ruto’s Sugoi home. During the meeting the leaders discussed many things including Ruto’s 2022 presidential bid. Before meeting the DP, the Kikuyu leaders and elders in Rift Valley had earlier met with their counterparts from the Kalenjin community and shared the ceremonial Kalenjin mursik milk outside Silverline Hotel in Eldoret as a sign of peaceful coexistence ahead of the 2022 elections. The delegation, pledged the community’s support for Ruto and told off a section of leaders from Mt Kenya who have poured cold water on his presidential bid. The meeting was the first between the DP and members of the Kikuyu community at his Sugoi home. But the Kalenjin elders on Friday claimed Mr Ngunjiri is a self–seeking politician and warned him to stop claiming that he speaks for the Kikuyu community living in the Rift Valley. “Mr Ngunjiri and the leaders, who accompanied him, do not speak for us. The future of DP Ruto’s house will be influenced by people he brings inside, “said Mr Kabage. The elders further lashed out at Mr Ngunjiri for misleading DP Ruto to wear the traditional Kikuyu attire against the cultural practices. Another elder, Peter Koech, said Ruto is his own man and will not depend on any endorsement from political bigwigs to clinch the presidency. “DP Ruto was the man behind President Kenyatta’s campaign in 2013 and 2017. He was also the man Raila Odinga’s 2007 presidential campaign. He does not require any endorsement from the bigwigs as he already has the support of the people at the grassroots,” Mr Koech said. During the same event, the elders challenged President Kenyatta to declare whether he still supports his deputy's bid for the presidency in 2022 as he had promised in 2013.  