Q: I seek your advice regarding my career progression. I am an accountant, with a Bachelor of Commerce in Finance and CPA-K certificates. I plan to take a Master’s degree, but I am unsure of which course to study. I have been thinking of either Master of Science in Finance or a Master of Science in Project Management. In your opinion, which course will give me the competitive edge I need to advance in my career? It is really impressive that you are looking for ways to enhance your competitiveness. I have seen many individuals who desire to grow into new roles, but don’t bother to invest in developing their skills. It is equally important that you have taken time to evaluate the areas you would like to study with a view of pursuing a course that will best complement your qualifications. I know some employees who hurriedly picked a course to study, only to realise that it was not well aligned to their career aspirations. They now hold two or three Master’s degrees for courses they never intended to pursue. The fact that they went ahead and got a second or third certificate is commendable, but it was obviously a costly option in terms of time and money. Therefore, it important to get it right the first time. Here’s how. First, ensure that the course you would like to pursue is well aligned to your career plans. In the next five to seven years, do you plan to lead a finance department that focuses on multiple projects, or to be a finance manager who consolidates all information from other departments — including projects — to prepare companywide accounts? Perhaps you aspire to be a general manager running a business division or department, but have your eyes trained on the top seat. Pick the option that will best equip you for that role. Another way of evaluating your options is to consider the subjects you studied in your BCom and CPA-K, then go for a programme that expands your knowledge instead of one that teaches you what you already know. With the onset of artificial intelligence, consider skills that are hard to automate so that you stand out. Competencies that are likely to be in demand in this age are sound decision making, people skills, diversity, financial analytics, advisory in taxation, and merge and acquisitions. Complimenting your professional background with business and leadership skills is an investment that will certainly pay off in the near future. Mwikali Muthiani - Managing Partner, MillennialHR (@MwikaliN; hr@millenialhr.com)  