James Ndunda, a handicap six golfer and one of the leading golfers in Machakos, is the 2020 ICEA Lion King of the course champion. Ndunda managed to beat a field of 125 players with a score of 37 points on the wet and tough playing Machakos Golf Club’s par 72 course to lift the crown and also walked away with a Sh20,000 cooker courtesy of title sponsors ICEA Lion Insurance Group, which sponsored the event on conjunction with Gelian Hotel, Machakos town’s top hotel. “It was my knowledge of the course plus my current top form which enabled me to beat all the other players including the defending champion and other leading golfers. I have been practicing a lot in preparation for this season and those other players better watch out for me this year," said Ndunda, who birdied the par five-18th in addition to 11 pars. He won the title by two points from second-placed Wilfred Oroko, who also made 11 pars and a birdie at the 10th, though three double-bogeys denied him a chance of beating the more experienced Ndunda. Francis Muthiani on 33 beat Nderitu Macharia on countback to claim the third prize. Royal Nairobi’s Kiplagat Chebii took the first prize among the guests with a score of 35 points, beating 2018 champion Adelbert Omooria by one point. In the ladies category, Machakos lady captain D Susan Musyoka carded 31 points to win ahead of Jane Kiiti on 28 points and club captain Joe Mboya won the first nine with a score of 21 points, while the second nine went to Leon Muteti on 20 points. Joseline Malangu was the staff winner with 16 points. The junior title was won by James Ikonya, who beat Miles Mwenda on countback with nett 76 as Eldoret Golf Club’s Aaron Kitur and Jane Kiiti won the longest drive contest, with Jack Musomba winning the nearest to pin prize. The second leg of the series now shift to Ruiru Sports Club on January 11, just a day after a King of The Course club night at Thika Greens Golf Resort. Speaking during the prize giving ceremony, ICEA Lion General Manager, Alvin Odhiambo, said his company was very delighted to have played a major role in shaping up the event which has now become a series and spread across the country. “We have been involved in this event for a long time and now that the event has become popular and a series with effect from this year, we will not only continue to partner with Machakos Golf Club, but also increase our budget to make sure that the series are very successful," said Odhiambo. He urged Machakos golfers and residents to try the several insurance packages the company offers, particularly the golf cover for those playing the game.  