Glistening roofs and freshly painted walls stand out in the compounds of several schools in Lamu West constituency, stirring excitement in learners. The newly built classrooms are courtesy of a campaign focused on facing out mud-walled classrooms for better-looking and more efficient permanent structures. The campaign dubbed ‘Phase Out Muddy-walled Classrooms for Proper Learning in Our Schools’ was kick started by Lamu West MP Stanley Muthama and has so far seen most schools with mud-walled buildings particularly in Lamu West Constituency each getting two new permanent classrooms.   Parents, teachers and pupils of most government primary schools in Lamu have on several occasions made pleas to the government to improve the infrastructure of their schools. Salama, Juhudi, Lumshi, Jericho, Poromoko, Boramoyo, Maisha Masha, Jipendeni, Amkeni and Mwangaza Primary schools still have mud-walled buildings. RISKY STRUCTURES   Parents and teachers worry the structures pose safety risks to the learners particularly during heavy rains when some of the buildings have in the past collapsed. The ongoing campaign has seen schools like Salama, Juhudi, Hongwe, Ungu, Manda-Maweni, Poromoko and Maisha Masha primary schools each getting two new permanent classrooms which have since been completed and are functional. Lamu West MP Stanley Muthama stated that the move is aimed at creating a conducive learning environment for pupils in Lamu.   Mr Muthama said the campaign is fully funded by the Lamu West National Government Constituency Development Fund (NG-CDF). The legislator appealed to the government through the Ministry of Education to ensure they allocate more funds to assist in the improvement of the general infrastructure in Lamu schools. “The little NG-CDF allocation we receive in Lamu every year isn’t enough to have all the challenges faced in our schools resolved. It’s high time that the government and the Ministry of Education allocate more funds that will assist in improving the education infrastructure in Lamu,” said Mr Muthama.  