Nairobi residents Monday woke up to a heavy traffic jam caused by the motorcade that was escorting the body of former President Daniel arap Moi to Parliament Buildings for the final day of public viewing. Most roads adjacent to Parliament were closed by traffic police officers and other security agencies to pave the way for the procession from Lee Funeral Home. There were snarl-ups on most roads leading into and out of the city, including Mombasa Road, Uhuru Highway, Juja Road, Enterprise Road, Lusaka Road, Jogoo Road, Ngong Road, Limuru Road and Lang’ata Road for the better part of the morning. The gridlocks persisted until midmorning as hundreds of Kenyans from all walks of life queued to view the former president's body as he lay in state. FORCED TO WALK Kenyans took to social media to react to the traffic snarl-up in the city. Some commuters who were in matatus opted to alight and walk into the city in order to get to work on time. @KenyaTraffic tweeted: “Passengers opt to walk, it’s just that I can’t do the same. Mombasa Road still at standstill two hours later.” On Thika road, a motorist noted that most of the vehicles on the highway were privately owned, suggesting that parking fees should be increased to Sh700 to discourage people from using their cars. “Parking fees in Nairobi should be increased to Sh700. Traffic is really messy and is caused mainly by private vehicles,” @Edu_Karis tweeted. On Langata road, motorists were stuck at the same spot for more than an hour. @KushmirK tweeted: “Langata road is a mess. One hour between Galleria and Wildlife.” Others suggested using a motorcycle as it would get commuters around faster than motor vehicles. Since Saturday, the streets have been dotted by heavy military presence as an entourage escorted Moi's body from the Lee Funeral Home to Parliament Buildings. Thousands of Kenyans, including political leaders, have been thronging Parliament to view the body. CLOSURE NOTICE On Friday, police warned Kenyans to brace themselves for traffic disruption as major roads would be closed in the city to facilitate movement of the body for viewing. Some roads will also be closed during the memorial service at Nyayo stadium Tuesday and on Wednesday during the burial at his home in Kabarak, Nakuru County. In Nairobi, Aerodrome Road will be closed Tuesday, February 11, 2020 from 6 am, while Uhuru Highway will be closed at the same time at Likoni, Bunyala, Valley Road and University Way (State House Road) roundabout. Traffic along Nairobi-Malaba Highway will be disrupted between Nairobi and Eldoret Tuesday and Wednesday. Nairobi-Eldoret Highway will be closed to all heavy commercial trucks and trailers from Tuesday at 12pm to Wednesday at 7 pm. Police boss Hillary Mutyambai asked road users to strictly adhere to the Highway Code to avoid inconveniences. "There will be enhanced police deployment to ensure public safety and security, and for traffic control and enforcement along the routes. We appeal to all the road users to cooperate with the police as we give a befitting sendoff to our former Head of State," said Mr Mutyambai.  