Police in Bungoma are looking for a gang that attacked three Kibabii University students in two separate incidents in the wee hours of Saturday. In the first incident, police said a student was gang-raped between 3am and 4am. The student was returning to her hostel from a pub at Tuttii with her boyfriend, also a student at the university, when they were attacked. Her boyfriend fled, leaving her at the mercy of the gang. Police said the five men attacked the girl with a panga and raped her in turns. Her boyfriend's creams attracted students who found her beside a road and made arrangements for her hospitalisation,. RAPED In the second incident at about 4am, a student who lives in a hostel outside the institution was attacked while on her way to her room. It was said that she was going to collect fare in order to accompany her schoolmates to a taekwondo competition in Homa Bay County. The gang asked her to surrender her phone but she ran away after pretending to look for it. She returned to the hostel and was assisted by other students. HOSPITAL Bungoma West Hospital CEC Jacob Wanyama said the three students were taken to hospital by a well-wisher on a motorcycle at about 4.45am. Two were treated and discharged while one was admitted. He said the rape victim will be transferred to the Moi Teaching and Referral Hospital for further treatment. Kibabii University Vice-Chancellor Ipara Odeo, who described the incidents as unfortunate, urged police to move with speed and arrest perpetrators of the crime. "It's unfortunate that social joints around the varsity operate till late, going against the directive of closing at 11pm, and exposing students to such incidents," he said. He said the institution is surrounded by heavy police units and yet such incidents happening. The VC advised the learners against staying out late into the night. PAST CASES This is the second time in four months that a Kibabii University student has been raped off campus. Another student was last year in November attacked and raped while on her way from night club with her colleagues. Bungoma South police boss Wilson Nanga said police opened investigations into the crimes. He asked residents to share with police information that may lead to the arrest of the gang.  