Unknown to many Kenyans, former President Daniel arap Moi was a great singer who entertained the congregation every Sunday at the African Inland Church Chapel at Kabarak University. The chapel’s chaplain Reverend Paul Makono Ombati said Mzee Moi’s singing sessions will greatly be missed by the congregation. ENJOYED SINGING “The Sunday service was never complete without his [Moi’s] presence as the congregation enjoyed his singing,” said Reverend Ombati. Reverend Ombati revealed that some of the songs that Mzee Moi loved are Never alone and Because He lives among others. “He was also very strict when it came to reading the Bible. When I was preaching, he could open his Bible and follow the proceedings,” he recalls Dr Ombati. SHARP MEMORY Reverend Ombati, who has been working at the AIC chapel for more than 13 years, said Mzee Moi had very sharp memory. “He could remember the names of students whenever he addressed them,” Dr Ombati said. “He set a new record of good leadership and I challenge other leaders to emulate him, more so, in his commitment to work of God,” he added. READ: Want to witness State funeral? Wake up early He said Mzee Moi kept on reminding the Kabarak fraternity that they would never go wrong if they had faith in God. “Mzee Moi was extremely generous and he paid school fees for students and extended his hands to [the] poor without discrimination,” he added. LEGEND Dr Ombati said the country and church has lost a legend whose legacy will forever be remembered by many generations to come. “Mzee Moi was a living example of good leadership, he loved God genuinely. He was punctual in attending the church sessions,” he said. READ: How Moi's burial is different from other Kalenjin sub-tribes “He made sure he was seated before the service started. This is a man who never forgot his Bible and his Golden Bells hymn book,” said Dr Ombati. He said he will remember Mzee Moi for his words of wisdom to the Kabarak fraternity and the entire country. “He emphasised the need for spiritual discipline and I challenge our leaders to emulate Mzee Moi by living his legacy and helping the poor in our communities,” said Dr Ombati.  