Parliament is set to hold a special sitting on Monday to allow MPs to condole with the family of retired President Daniel arap Moi who died on Tuesday at the age of 95. The Kenya Defence Forces (KDF) have already taken charge of security arrangements at Parliament Buildings ahead of the arrival of the body which will lie in state in Parliament for three days. Mr Moi was the long serving MP for Baringo North from 1963 to 1966 when it was renamed Baringo Central. He held the seat until his retirement as President in 2002. National Assembly Speaker Justin Muturi has approved a request by Leader of Majority Aden Duale to convene a special sitting of the House at 2.30pm. The occasion will also be used to convey President Uhuru Kenyatta’s nominees for Cabinet, Mr Mutahi Kagwe (Health) and Betty Maina (Trade and Industrialisation), as well as six Principal Secretaries, for vetting. Mr Duale will lead the House in conveying special condolences of the House following the Presidential Proclamation regarding the passing on of the second president. Mr Moi will be buried at his Kabarak home on Wednesday. “That, following the Presidential Proclamation …, the condolences of this House be recorded in honour of the retired President’s long service to this House, his selfless and exemplary service to the republic and for promoting good neighbourliness and stability in the region,” reads Mr Duale’s motion. The ''Business Daily'' has learnt that Kenyans with national identity cards (IDs) will be allowed to access the precincts of Parliament to view the body and pay their last respects to the departed former President. Top military commanders held a closed-door meeting yesterday morning that was chaired by National Assembly Clerk Michael Sialai and attended by his Senate counterpart Jeremiah Nyegenye at Parliament Buildings to map out security and protocol arrangements for the State funeral. Shortly after the meeting, military officers in full combat gear took strategic positions in Parliament. The former Head of State will be accorded full military ceremonial honours, which include conveyance of the body under escort in a gun carriage, accompanied by military musical honours and a 19 gun-salute.  