Harambee Starlets forward Esse Akida has joined Turkish giants Besiktas on a two-year deal. The deal comes 12 months after her one-year deal with Israel-based club Ramat Haasharon came to an end. Akida, who was part of the Starlets squad that made history when they qualified for the 2016 Africa Women Cup of Nations (AWCON), put pen to paper on Monday afternoon after successful trials. Akida joined Thika Queens in 2018 June from Spedag FC, where she started out. Both teams participated in last year's Women Premier League contest with Thika Queens finishing third and Spedag being relegated to Division One. Akida follows in the footsteps of Annedy Kundu, Ruth Ingosi and Vivian Odhiambo, who have signed for European clubs this year. The 28-year-old was delighted with move and is relishing the chance of playing in the Champions League. According to the speedy striker, she is living her dream and is eager to kick start her campaign in Turkey. Happy "I am happy to be joining a team with a rich history. They have done well in the past and the challenge now is to be the best here because I believe I will be competing with the best. My aim has always been to play in the champions’ league and I know I will get that here. I cannot wait to get started," she said. The Moving The Goalposts (MTG) and St John's Kaloleni High School prodigy also stated that she relies solely on hard work since it complements her talent. She believes that as long as she puts in the work, she will always get the best results. “I’m aware that it is an uphill task but I am willing to go the distance. Over the years, I have also believed that hard work beats talent and however much one is talented when it comes to football, who wants it more carries the day. It is my hope and prayer that with the passion I have, I will be able to continue giving my best at my new club. The league here is ongoing and they are now in the second leg of the season and I would like to make my presence felt each time I get an opportunity,” Akida added. Besiktas is currently placed second in the 12-team league with 36 points, a point behind league leaders ALG Spor.  