Things are getting tricky for at least three governors who are facing impeachment threats in Western region. A section of ward reps are burning the midnight oil mooting grounds that could support the ouster bid. In the latest case, at least 13 Siaya Ward Reps are mobilising for an impeachment ploy, although Governor Colonel Rasanga’s cronies are not giving them a chance. The tide has turned against the mastermind of the ploy; East Gem Ward Rep Samuel Siguru. The Nation learnt Thursday that the member of county assembly (MCA) has mobilised his 13 colleagues for a strategy meeting in Kisumu as the ouster plot thickened. But even before he could marshal the requisite numbers and table the impeachment motion at the assembly, a group of youths from his ward, kicked off a drive to recall him. He believes the latter move is a counter attack from the executive to frustrate the ouster bid. By Wednesday the youths, led by a voter-Mr Charles Onguko had collected 500 signatures in the bid to oust the MCA whom they are accusing of abandoning his electorate. Speaking to Nation at his office, Mr Siguru swore to forge ahead with the planned impeachment motion against Governor Rasanga. But the governor declined to comment on the issue. In Kisumu, residents and a section of MCAs are now demanding that Governor Anyang’ Nyong’o resigns from office or faces impeachment following what they term as failure by the county boss to handle woes facing the health sector in the region. This followed an outcry over closure of various health facilities as medics kept off their workstation for a whole week over no salaries among other challenges bedevilling the sector. While a section of MCAs called for Nyong’o’ impeachment, activists called for the health function to be reverted to the national government for better management. During Wednesday afternoon session, Awasi Onjiko Ward MCA Maurice Ngeta raised concern on the poor state of county’s health system. Other members also expressed their displeasure with the manner in which the governor was handling health matters. In Vihiga, Governor Ottichilo is also in the heat of a storm after MCAs began collecting signatures to support his impeachment over delayed salaries for county workers, among other things. The governor defended himself from the allegations and called on the MCAs to join his efforts to serve Vihiga people instead of fighting him.  Report by Dickens Wasonga, Rushdie Oudia and Ken Wamasebua  