Kiambu Governor James Nyoro Wednesday nominated Ms Joyce Ngugi as his deputy. Mr Nyoro told a media briefing at county headquarters that his choice of Ms Ngugi was reached after wide consultations at county and national government levels. The decision is meant to move the county forward to offer better services to the electorates, he added. Ms Ngugi, widow of former Gatundu South MP Joseph Ngugi who died in 2014, will now face vetting by county assembly. “The new reorganisation will help the Kiambu government streamline service delivery. I will be making more changes in a few days to come to ensuring there is service delivery in the county,” said Mr Nyoro. Speaking to journalists Wednesday, Ms Ngugi expressed joy at the nomination and promised to work with Mr Nyoro to steer the county forward. “I am very happy and at the same time shocked by the nomination by Mr Nyoro to be the Deputy Governor of Kiambu. I look forward to working with his administration and other like-minded leaders to offer better services to the people of Kiambu,” she said. At the same time, the governor announced changes to his cabinet that saw some county executives sacked. Vocal former radio journalist, Mr Karungo wa Thang’wa, who headed Youth Affairs docket and close ally of impeached Kiambu Governor Ferdinand Waititu was sacked, as was Roads, Transport, Public Works and Energy executive Juliet Kimemia and Education executive Joseph Ng’ang’a. Those reshuffled include: Mr Francis Kigo Njenga, who moved from finance docket to trade, and Ms Mary Kamau from Health to Education docket. Other cabinet appointments include Roads, Transport, Public Works and Energy executive that saw the nomination of Samuel Mugo while Youth and Sports was handed to Ms Isabela Nyambura. Mr Joseph Murega was nominated to head the Health docket while the position of Chief of staff went to Mr Muturi Maina Mr James Mitambo was given the Housing and Urban Planning docket and David Kimani the Water docket. The Administration and Management docket was handed to Ms Margraet Waithira while Livestock docket went to Joseph Kamau while Roads docket was handed to Mr Samuel Mugo. Soon after Nyoro took the oath of office, leaders started to pile pressure on him to nominate a female deputy. Kiambu County Assembly Speaker Stephen Ndichu said he had talked to the governor over same and he responded in affirmative. While congratulating ward reps for doing their oversight role, Mr Ndichu asked Governor Nyoro to consider nominating a female deputy governor. “The position of the deputy governor is now vacant and it is open to anybody, I have talked to the governor and he has told me that he has no problem nominating a lady,” said Mr Ndichu.  