The Defence ministry has denied involvement in the Sh40 billion military equipment scandal, that has seen the office of the Deputy President put on the spot and former Sports Cabinet Secretary Rashid Echesa arrested. Mr Echesa allegedly used DP William Ruto's office to swindle Sh11 million as brokerage fees from directors of Echo Advanced Technologies LLC, claiming he could help them win the lucrative tender. It is also alleged that he forged Defence Cabinet Secretary Monica Juma's signature to convince Echo representatives that it was a government deal. Mr Echesa was charged on Monday, alongside Daniel Otieno, Clifford Okoth and Kennedy Oyoo, with 12 counts of attempting to defraud the organisation. They denied all the charges and were released on Sh1 million cash bail each. MINISTRY'S POSITION In a statement following Monday's events, the Defence ministry noted that investigators and complainants visited its headquarters in Nairobi to verify presence of the officers they met. "During the visit, it was established that the complainants have never interacted with any official mandated to represent the Ministry of Defence," Public Communications director Bogita Onderi said in the statement. He added," All the documents and content displayed in the media, pertaining the matter, never originated from the Ministry of Defence." The ministry further noted use of an elaborate procurement process, guided by Public Procurement and Assets Disposal Act, 2016. It accused the media of creating a "scandalous and libellous" narrative and said it would seek redress. The documents in question include an end-user certificate, a non-disclosure agreement, letters of award and an extension of notification of award letter. They were used to prepare a contract between the ministry and Echo, a company owned by American Koziowski Stanley Bruno. Signed by Mr Echesa, his three co-accused and others, they were reportedly presented as the genuine ones from the ministry, the aim being to fraudulently obtain money from Mr Bruno. THE VISIT Mr Echesa and two men visited the DP's Harambee House office from 9.39 am to 10.02 am. Upon arrival, they were ushered into the waiting room as per visiting standards. Mr Echesa reportedly claimed he had an appointment with the DP but did not meet him as he was scheduled to work from his Karen office. In addition, the DP's diary stated he had no scheduled appointment with Mr Echesa and that he later left for Murang'a County to attend a burial. Read: Sh39bn fraud details emerge as Echesa gets bail SO FAR Detectives from the Directorate of Criminal Investigations (DCI) arrested Mr Echesa last Friday over the fake military equipment tender. He was arraigned on Friday at the Jomo Kenyatta International Airport (JKIA) court, where police sought to detain him for 21 days to complete the investigation. CCTV footage taken from DP Ruto’s office that day positively identified two of his aides as being present on February 13, when Mr Echesa met officials from Echo over the deal. In his response to links to the scam, Dr Ruto seemed to agree that the meeting took place but said more people could have been involved in the scam. He has accused his political rivals of launching a smear campaign and now wants the investigations expedited without interference by politicians and the media. On Monday, Mr Echesa's lawyers asked the court to order release of two vehicles and firearms seized during a search at his home since they were not mentioned in the charge sheet. They further asked the court to bar Kitui Governor Charity Ngilu, Siaya Senator James Orengo, Francis Atwoli, who is Secretary-General of the Central Organisation of Trade Unions (Cotu), and other politicians from discussing the matter. The court declined to gag anyone, noting freedom of speech. Additional reporting by Mercy Chelangat  