Plans to construct a Sh21 billion wind power plant in Lamu County have been dealt a huge blow after assembly members on Wednesday unanimously passed a motion to nullify the project over alleged failure to meet the required conditions. The project was being undertaken by Baharini Wind Power, a partnership between Elicio Company from Belgium and Kenwind Holdings Ltd, a local firm. A total of 3,206 acres of land had already been set aside for the project in Baharini, Lamu West. The project was expected to generate 90 megawatts of electricity upon completion. While moving the motion, Bahari Ward MCA, Mr Anthony Njomo noted that the assembly had on July 22, 2015 resolved to approve the project on condition that all the required recommendations are met. Among the conditions was that the project was not to use any other land set aside for other purposes. LAND ALLOCATION Furthermore, the land allocation was to be initiated by the National Land Commission (NLC) with the consent of the county government and approval of the assembly for a period not exceeding 25 years. On Wednesday, Mr Njomo said Kenwind Power Project had failed to comply with some of the listed conditions, which led to confusion, displacement and chaos in the local community. He said the land on which the investor intends to resettle those affected by the project had already been demarcated, surveyed and titled and there was no free land for resettlement. The rep also noted that the investor was directly involved in the resettlement, instead of contracting SGS Kenya to work independently, hence directly affecting and influencing the outcome of the entire process. NULLIFY PROJECT “I, therefore, urge this house to nullify the project ... and compel the county government to reallocate to the people affected the land that was meant for the project,” said Mr Njomo. The investor had already launched a resettlement action plan last December. In February, Kenya Power signed a 20-year Power Purchase Agreement with the firm. There were plans to put up 38 turbines of 90MW capacity in Baharini village, about 40kms from the Lamu Port South Sudan Ethiopia Transport (Lapsset) Corridor project in Kililana.