The war against corruption has been hampered by two things. First, most suspects never get caught, and those who do are rarely convicted because the cases take too long and often collapse for lack of evidence. The reason for that collapse is deliberate; the investigators and prosecutors ensure there is no concrete evidence to sustain the suit.Second, whenever suspects are convicted, the penalties are mild and, worse, the culprits are never surcharged for what they stole. In effect, they retain the loot, which they lavishly enjoy after conviction. Simply put, corruption has never been made painful.Given this background, we are encouraged by the ruling made by High Court Judge Mumbi Ngugi on the Sh791 million scandal at the National Youth Service that played out in 2015. All assets and properties acquired through the scam will be repossessed by government. In a precedent-setting ruling, the judge declared that corruption suspects are liable for criminal conviction and forfeiture of assets and properties obtained through the ill-gotten wealth. This is vital and should serve as a deterrent. The country has suffered a great deal because of institutionalised corruption. Some multibillion-shilling corruption cases such as the Goldenberg scandal of the early 1990s and Anglo Leasing of early 2000 have never been concluded and the culprits have moved on as if nothing happened. In the early years of the National Rainbow Coalition (Narc), efforts were made to track down and repossess money that had been stolen and kept in foreign banks or properties bought out of the proceeds, but that initiative fizzled out. Top government officials who had earlier been enthusiastic about the plan grew cold feet as they also engrained themselves in the gravy train. Under the current administration, many corruption cases have been reported but have not been acted upon. The other reason Judge Ngugi’s ruling is illuminating is that it makes the Judiciary stand out and be seen to be fighting in the public’s corner. Several times in the past, the Judiciary has been accused of complicity in the fight against graft as the cases are made to drag on for too long, and when convictions are made, the penalties are mild, making nonsense of judicial authority. Thus, we exhort various agencies involved in investigations and prosecution to aggressively pursue pending corruption matters and push them to the logical conclusion. The country will not win the war against corruption unless it is made costly and painful.