Detectives in Murang’a have narrowed down to cultism, mental disorder and attempted defilement as the most likely motives behind last Sunday’s murder of a nine-year-old girl allegedly by a 15-year-old school boy. Purity Njeri Chege, a Grade Three pupil at Ihiga-ini Primary School, was strangled to death and buried in a shallow grave allegedly by her schoolmate, a Class Six pupil, a few hours after she had accompanied the suspect to harvest avocados in his father’s shamba. Murang’a head of criminal investigations Juliana Muthini said homicide detectives have been dispatched to try and unravel the incident. Ms Muthini said the boy was arraigned in Kigumo Wednesday. The court allowed police to detain him for 14 more days. EXPLORE POSSIBLE LEADS  “It is within those 14 days that we will explore all the possible leads with a view to unravelling the real motive behind the murder. So far, we are convinced we have the prime suspect,” she said.  Ms Muthini added that the boy has been profiled as “a church-going character with inclinations to extreme fantasies and living in a village rumoured to believe in human sacrifices.” Wednesday, Kigumo MP Mary Wa Maua visited the family and said drug abuse, subscription to suspicious faiths as well as sexual impropriety among minors was to blame for various social ills. OTHER FORCES  Ms Wa Maua said she was convinced there were other forces behind the murder and called upon the detectives to be thorough.  She claimed that the boy was sexually active and it was possible that he had attempted to rape the girl but upon meeting resistance, he murdered her.   “We are studying the boy’s mental condition since at his age he is supposed to be in secondary school. He is also said to have been suffering from very low esteem since most of his age mates had undergone circumcision two years ago while he remained behind,” she said.  She said that also to be established is whether there are other suspects in the murder “given that the process appears elaborate and the disposal method appeared to have been hard for one culprit to execute.”  She appealed to any person who might have relevant information to share with the officers so as to ensure justice prevailed.