My brother Pius always comes home every other month. But when he takes long to visit, he comes after three months. If you remember, the last time he was here was last December, when he came with Ford – my brother who is a prison warden at Shimo La Tewa Maximum Prison. At the time, the two were loaded with money, and we all had a great time until police arrived. Pius disappeared in thin air while Ford crossed River Lukose amid gun shots, and he has never been seen again. He, however, called me later to say all was okay. In February, Pius called me to say he would be coming for Easter. He, however, did not travel due to Covid restrictions. When the cessation of movement was lifted, he called saying he would be coming any day. REUNITE We debated the decision to reunite at Hitler’s. “If its true the President has allowed Nairobi people to come to the villages, kwisha sisi,” said Kizito, who has remained holed here.Rasto told him off, saying not many people have Corona. “Does anyone here know anyone who has Corona?” He asked. “All we hear are announcements of numbers on radio and TV,” said Alphayo. “We haven’t seen or heard of anyone we know who has the disease.” Kizito said we did not know anyone with Corona because the government had contained the disease in Nairobi and Mombasa. “And you do not know many people in Nairobi other than your few relatives there.” “I am lucky I’m here at home. I would have gotten it,” he said. “I know many people in Nairobi who have Corona, even my workmates.” “But are they still alive or died?” Asked Saphire. Kizito said only two people he knew had died — the rest had either recovered or were recovering. “Basi Corona ni homa tu, tutazoea,” said Hitler, adding that liquor was an antidote to homa, and would also treat Corona. “Let’s not joke with this thing,” Kizito said. “Most of those who recovered are young and fit. The two people who died were a little old and had been sickly with other diseases…” “Then they died of the other diseases, not Corona,” said Saphire, telling him to stop spreading fear. Kizito announced that he would not interact with anyone coming from Nairobi. “Let me be called names, but I am not ready to die.” He particularly warned Alphayo, Rasto and Hitler. “If I were you, I would start wearing a mask and not leave home from tomorrow, when Nairobi people will start arriving.” he added: “Even you Saphire – I doubt you will survive Corona since you do not eat well.” WEARING MASK The next few days, Kizito started moving around wearing a mask, consistently. Like every other village, we had tried wearing masks about a month ago when it was the in-thing, and when the chief insisted. But a few days later, almost everyone stopped, including the chief. But Kizito convinced me and I also started wearing one constantly. For the next two days, no Nairobi bus arrived. I told Kizito that Pius would be coming although he had not indicated the day. “That’s dangerous,” he told me. We called Pius together with Kizito to discourage him from coming, but he insisted on visiting us, saying he had been tested and turned negative. “You people think Corona is airborne? No, it’s not in the air. You only get the virus if you get into contact with someone who has it. I haven’t, but even if I do so, I always have my mask on. I sanitise and wash hands regularly. I will come,” he said and hang up. “He can be negative, but get the virus while on the road,” said Kizito. I alerted my close family members, telling them to avoid Pius should he come over. But it was difficult convincing my parents. DIABETES This thing is bad, the majority of people who have died are those with diabetes and pressure. My mother has problems with her pressure while my old man has had sugar issues since time immemorial. On Wednesday afternoon, we, as usual, congregated at Hitler’s. Only Kizito and I had masks. At around 6pm, we saw someone walking towards us. We could not recognise him from far as he was wearing a face mask and a heavy jacket.  As he came closer, it became clear who he was – my brother Pius. He had travelled despite us warning him not to come. Kizito gulped down his drink and told Rasto, his father, that they leave. “Siwezi pata Corona nikiona na macho” he said as they left hurriedly. Saphire, Tito and Alphayo also took off in different directions while Nyayo quickly mounted his motorcycle and disappeared. Hitler entered his house and locked himself inside, shouting that Pius should not touch anything. I am the only one who was left behind. I couldn’t run away from my own brother. Luckily, I had my mask on, and pulled it to cover even the eyes. My hands were fully in my pockets. Pius sat down, wondering why people were running away from him. I convinced him to go to his home, and followed him from a distance until at the gate. He, however, refused to enter, saying he needed to see our parents, and started walking there. But I walked ahead of him so I could warn my parents. Word had quickly spread that we had someone from Nairobi in the village. There were people looking at us from the safety of their homes or farms. “Angalia vile amekonda,” I heard one woman say, pointing at Pius. “Hii Corona kweli ni mbaya” another one said. Luckily, when we arrived at my parents’ home, all doors were closed from outside although I knew they were in. Pius went to his house. That evening, Fiolina made food and sent Branton to go and place it a few metres from Pius’ house. I called Pius to tell him to get his supper and instructed him to throw away the utensils after use. No one went to his home the next day. The food was still where Branton had placed it. Pius called me later that evening saying he had returned to Nairobi. “How can people who don’t sanitise or wear masks ran away from someone who takes all hygiene precautions and wears a mask? Corona ikifika huko mtaisha wote. Wote mtapata. You don’t even keep social distance!” He said and disconnected.