The fight against the Covid-19 global pandemic could be negated by two vices that are well engrained in the DNA of Kenyans: A casual approach by the general populace and corruption by Afya House cartels. Despite the threat from Health CS Mutahi Kagwe that “if we continue to behave normally, this disease will treat us abnormally”, it is widely perceived that the safety guidelines exclude politicians, who continue flouting them by holding public gatherings. In what appeared to be a sign of growing frustration from the political class, Health CAS, Dr Rashid Aman, confessed to the media in late May that “we have no control over politicians and leaders who go against the Covid-19 protocols”. The casual approach to procurement procedures, decision-making and information management best explains the frustration the top health officers face in the war against the pandemic. Could it be the same casual approach that has been at the ministry for long that the minister alluded to in his call to change? CORRUPTION Alive to the fact that graft is endemic at Afya House and that that could be the biggest bottleneck in the Covid-19 war, Mr Kagwe recently blasted “mafisi” in his ministry and vowed to dismantle them. The CS said he would unearth a few individuals ruining the good name of his office by conducting illegal businesses. The ministry is dogged by a myriad corruption scandals. Procurement procedures at Afya House have been tailored to be opaque to abet corruption. But will the CS succeed where his predecessors didn’t? Can he tame the crooks who have called the shots at one of the most important ministries for decades? Many failed at the ministry due to glue mentality, where friends and proxies became business partners. Kagwe has what it takes to surmount the challenge. He is not a greenhorn and can’t be intimated. Already, some officers have been moved from their plum Afya House offices, and more, according to insiders, many are likely to fall out. INTIMIDATE OFFICERS But the CS must also deal with individuals who use his office to advance promotions or employ point-men in key departments to perpetuate graft. He must get rid of tenderpreneurs from the corridors of Afya House as they intimidate his officers. It is encouraging that he CS said he is aware that a few ministry employees engage in the illegal business of issuing fake tenders to unsuspecting business people. Acknowledging that Afya House has its fair share of criminals, Kagwe has his job cut out for him. Such individuals are the most dangerous and a threat to the collective fight against Covid-19. It is important to ensure that emergency funds for Covid-19 are used to eradicate the pandemic. This calls for clarity on the management of the funds donated to face the health emergency. It is only prudent that we appreciate the different measures put in place by the government to contain the spread of the pandemic. But the reported misuse of funds is worrying. The CS must expeditiously “sanitise” the Kenya Medical Supplies Authority (Kemsa) over its poor performance and graft. Importantly, officials in all the ministries must overcome the “one above syndrome”, commonly where departmental heads jump to say they have been authorised by “powers from above”, and take full responsibility of their actions. Mr Masava is a communication specialist. mmasava@gmail.com.