Two more South African ministers have tested positive for the new coronavirus as the pandemic continues to attack what seemed to be an invisible part of the society. Mineral Resources and Energy minister Gwede Mantashe and his wife were confirmed to have contracted the virus, before Thulas Nxesi, who is responsible for the Employment and Labour portfolio, was on Friday announced to have been infected as well. According to the Government Communication and Information System (GCIS) on Mr Mantashe; “This was the minister’s third round of tests to be conducted since the outbreak of this virus. Minister Mantashe and Mrs Mantashe are currently in isolation and the minister will continue to work from home.” On Mr Nxesi, cabinet spokesperson Phumla Williams said he “remains in high spirits and confident that he will beat the virus.” “Minister Nxesi is in self-isolation and will continue to work from home. All members of the office of the Minister, who have come in contact with him will also undergo testing.,” added Ms Williams. The latest infections come just as it was announced by the government that Defence and Military Veterans minister Nosiviwe Mapisa-Nqakula has recovered from Covid-19. Ms Mapisa-Nqakula’s husband Charles, who is the national security advisor to South Africa President Cyril Ramaphosa, has also recovered. South Africa is now experiencing a runaway surge in coronavirus cases which now stand at 337,594 and 4,804 deaths. Daily new infections are now averaging 12,000 for a country with the sixth-highest cases in the world as of Friday. High profile individuals like government officials are headlining the continued rise in the number of people contracting the virus. Deputy minister of Social Development Hendrietta Bogopane-Zulu is recovering in isolation after testing positive while Nkosi Holomisa, the deputy minister of Justice and Correctional Services has recovered. Other notable government officials to have tested recently positive for coronavirus include Gauteng Province Premier David Makhura as well as his North West and Western Cape Provinces counterparts Job Mokgoro and Alan Winde respectively. The trio is recovering and currently working from their respective homes.