Dhalia and Swain have claimed two Ascot King George VI and Queen Elizabeth Qipco Stakes since its inception in 1951, but Enable has now surpassed that magnificence, with a brain-boggling performance on Saturday. Needless to say, Frankie Dettori shed tears in the winner's enclosure, because Enable has touched his heart like no other. Unimaginably, there was plenty silence to greet the great lady, as she had the race sewn up in embroidieralic artistry, a couple of furlongs out. As was forecast, Frankie has now equalled Sir Lester-Piggott's seven strikes in this prestigious race. John Gosden was overwhelmed with his precious steed, owned and bred by Khalid Abdullah. John and Khaled have had a forty-year, spotless association. Sovereign (William Buick 12-1) and Japan (Ryan Moore 2-1), were arguably her only rivals, but even they were numbed by Enable's sheer undiluted love of the thrill. Japan was off the bridle, while Sovereign simply had no matching abilities. Frankie said: "She was like a hot knife through butter. Shall be really sad when her retirement arrives after the Prix de l'Arc at Longchamp. Before that she runs in the York Tote Ebor or Juddmonte International, come August. Bookies are unable to split Enable and Love, offering 3-1 apiece. Love is opening her lungs in the Yorkshire Oaks." *** Roger Charlton stayed at home despite having big-race runners at York and Ascot, but Beckhampton House was twisting away after Aspetar(Jason Watson 11-1), flew through the Sky Bet York Stakes, shelving Fox Chairman (Silvestre de Souza 8-1), and Lord Glitters (Daniel Tudhope 16-1). The 1.2 miles was quite slow on 2:07:5/10 seconds.  Blue Mist had just taken the Moet Chandon International at Ascot for Roger. Aspetar is now considered a promising candidate for the Juddmonte, which is bottling up some fantastic players on the Knavesmere. *** Staying magician, Stradivarius, will encounter only six participants in his quest to brochure a fourth Goodwood Cup on Tuesday, again for John Gosden. Stradivarius is now six. He blasted other competitors by ten lengths in the Gold Cup, but is up against Santiago for Aiden O'Brien, conceding 15lbs. Eagles by Day, Nayef Road, Spanish Mission, Who Dares Win, and, Euchen Glen, fill up the field. Glorious Goodwood is favored by all pundits, and they have a treat when Battaash aims for a fourth King George Qatar Stakes. He is a rocket sprinter who might have to dispense with Glass Slippers, Al Raya, Dubai Station, Ken Colt, and, Liberty Beach. This is just a short preview of a scintillating basket of events in store.