Muslims across the county began celebrating the Idd-ul-Adha (the feast of sacrifice), which marks the culmination of the annual Hajj. Every year, Muslims celebrate the festival with their friends, family and community by gathering for morning prayer, followed by sharing food. They also donate food and supplies to people in need. But, the coronavirus pandemic has forced many to change the way they celebrate the festival this year. Prayers in open grounds, which is in line with the traditions of Prophet Mohammed (SAW), were observed minimally Friday as some counties including Mombasa have banned large gatherings. In Mombasa, the congregational prayers were conducted at Ummul Kulthum in Kizingo and Masjid Musa the most popular mosques in the county. Men were clad in Islamic robes and women in veils with their masks on as they attended the prayers. “We are happy that we managed to pray together. When we pray together that is when we feel like we have celebrated this day,” said Suleiman Hashim, a faithful. After the prayers, the faithful went back home and prepared to slaughter goats as per the religious teachings. Idd is an Arabic word that means feast or festival, and Adha means sacrifice. The holy feast is not to be confused with Idd-ul-Fitr which is marked at the end of the holy month of Ramadhan which comes earlier. Idd-ul-Adhais marked on the 10th day of Dhul Hijja through morning prayers and, thereafter, slaughtering of an animal — preferably a lamb — in remembrance of Abraham and his son Ismail. Thursday, leaders across the country led by President Uhuru Kenyatta wished Muslims happy Idd. “As we celebrate Idd-ul-Adha, let us remember that in times of crisis it is personal sacrifices that ensure triumph over difficulty. Wishing you and your family a blessed Idd,” said President Kenyatta on Twitter. In his message, Chief Kadhi Ahmed Muhdhar urged Muslims to continue observing the Ministry of Health guidelines as they celebrate. “Let us follow the protocols the way we did during the other Idd. I wish all of us a happy Idd,” he said. When he declared Friday as a public holiday, Interior CS Fred Matiang’i also urged the faithful to celebrate Idd with minimal person-to-person contact, and in strict and full compliance with the guidelines issued by the Inter Faith Council with the approval of the Ministry of Health. 