Environment and Forestry Cabinet Secretary Keriako Tobiko much publicised tour of the Eastern Mau Forest Complex in Mariashoni, Molo, Nakuru County on Saturday was cancelled in the last minute. Hundreds of members of Ogiek community, who have been evicted from the water tower converged at Mariashoni trading centre as early as 7am Saturday. Area chief, and police officers patrolled the trading centre and monitored the movement of residents. However, by 1pm, the CS had not arrived. A source told the Nation that Mr Tobiko arrived in Nakuru town and held a closed door meeting with the Regional Commissioner George Natembeya and top Kenya Forest Service (KFS). It was not immediately established why he skipped the tour of the water tower. Efforts to reach the Cabinet secretary were futile as he did not pick our calls. Ogiek elders had disputed new cutlines in the water tower. On Thursday, Molo Deputy Commissioner David Wanyonyi toured the area and identified the cutlines in the presence of some elders. However, the exercise to identify the boundaries was criticised by the elders who described it as a violation of a court order. The residents were later addressed by Ogiek Council of Elders Chairperson Joseph Kimaiyo Towett. “We were hoping to welcome CS Tobiko in Mariashoni and hear what plans he has to resettle more than 700 families of the Ogiek who have so far been evicted from the forest,” said Mr Towett. “We want CS Tobiko to appoint two working committees led by National Environment Management Authority (Nema), KFS and National Land Commission, provincial administration and National Museums of Kenya to end 30 years of violation of Ogiek human rights,” said Mr Towett. He urged the minister to form the second committee to deal with the resettlement of the Ogiek. Mr Towett said: “Even if Ogiek are resettled without addressing the runaway poverty, they are likely to sell their land,” added Mr Towett. Reverend Nelson Timose, who was evicted from the forest, said that many of the Ogiek were living in squalid conditions in various camps in the area. “During this period of coronavirus pandemic it is very dangerous to have people living in camps and we urge the government to address this crisis once and for all. The Ogiek have suffered for more than three decades while seeking justice,” said Rev Timose. The community first moved to court in 1997 and obtained an order restricting the government against settling people in the Eastern Mau Complex. The matter, which dragged in court for 17 years, was determined in 2014. The Environment and Lands Court Judge Pauline Nyamweya directed the National Land Commission to open a register of members of the Ogiek in consultation with their council of elders and identify land for their settlement, all within one year. The court also nullified all illegally obtained title deeds from the complex and imposed a caveat.