The sudden death of actor Charles Bukeko popularly known as Papa Shirandula is a double blow to the entertainment fraternity, coming so soon after the passing on of Ohangla music star Lady Maureen. As Lady Maureen was being laid to rest on Saturday in Migori, fellow mercurial entertainer Bukeko famed for the Papa Shirandula show on Citizen TV, succumbed to breathing complications linked to coronavirus at Karen Hospital in Nairobi. Mr Bukeko, 58, will be remembered especially for the remarkable role he played in revolutionising Kenyan TV comedy, elevating it from the days of the legendary KBC TV comedy programmes such as Vitimbi and Vioja Mahakamani. There was some class and finesse to his flagship Papa Shirandula show, which transcended the permanent studio set to take in surroundings with much more movement and give it a life much like a short movie. For the older generation, the then sole State broadcaster, KBC's TV (then VOK) comedies had kept viewers glued to their screens from the 1970s well into the early 1990s. A hearse carrying the remains of Charles Bukeko, famously known as Papa Shirandula, at Montezuma Monalisa Funeral Home in Nairobi on July 19, 2020.PHOTO | DENNIS ONSONGO | NATION MEDIA GROUP But Mr Bukeko was in the new generation that came up with a diversified concept of TV comedy that catered for all age groups. In Papa Shirandula, he realistically played the role of a witty security guard alongside Wilbroda (Jackie Nyaminde), who starred as his wife. One of the most enduring images from the show is that of the hefty security guard riding a bicycle to and from work in his red uniform. Like many artistes who were born and grew up in Nairobi’s Eastlands, Mr Bukeko, who was fondly referred to as “Baby”, was a fan of the then VoK TV programmes. He would later become an active participant in those shows, making forays into stage acting at Kenya National Theatre. Unknown to many of the grieving fans, entertainment was in Bukeko's family DNA. His maternal uncle, Kizito Juma, was one of the founder members of the legendary Lang'ata Barracks-based Maroon Commandos band. Mr Kizito teamed up with his fellow soldiers, including Habel Kifoto and Ibrahim Ringo to form the Maroon Commandos Band at Gilgil Barracks in 1970. Speaking to the Nation, veteran musician Tuesday Oguro, who is also a former member of Maroon Commandos, eulogised Mr Bukeko for his sterling prowess as a TV comedian. “We are saddened to have lost this gallant TV actor from our Busia home county," he said. TERRIBLY SADDENED Rhumba musicians Principessa Eve Namulanda and Ken Makokha, who are also from Busia, said they had been terribly saddened by the loss of one of Kenya's top TV comedians. In Nairobi, TV comedian and radio show host Jalang’o (Felix Odiwour) recalled how Mr Bukeko gave him the stage name he uses to date. He said he was especially proud of the fallen star who not only inspired him, but also many others into TV acting. With many TV accolades to his credit, including the Kalasha awards in 2010 and taking parting in TV commercials, Bukeko was a giant on the Kenyan entertainment scene. Notably, he played a role in 2010 Fifa Wold Soccer commercial that received a lot of worldwide attention. He also took part in the now famous Coca-Cola Brrr advert.