Amani National Congress MPs from Kakamega County have asked Governor Wycliffe Oparanya to back party leader Musalia Mudavadi in his bid for the presidency. The ANC parliamentarians also told Mr Oparanya, who is Council of Governors chair, to position himself for a key position in the next government in the event of constitutional changes through the Building Bridges Initiative (BBI). Tindi Mwale (Butere), Ayub Savula (Lugari) and Justus Murunga (Matungu) advised the governor to go for the deputy Prime Minister post. “Should the BBI result in leadership changes in the Constitution and should Governor Oparanya decide to contest for the Butere parliamentary seat as a stepping stone to becoming the deputy Prime Minister, I will step down and support him,” said Mr Mwale. He said he would eye other positions, including senator and deputy governor. NO TROUBLE Mr Savula said since Mr Mudavadi is looking to succeed President Uhuru Kenyatta come the 2022 General Election, he will not clash with Mr Oparanya should the latter go for the deputy PM office. “We are waiting for the fate of the BBI. We shall sit together as leaders from Western region so that we share slots in the next government. We don’t have any conflict between Mudavadi and Oparanya because they are not competing for any seat,” he said. He called on the Luhya community to stand with Mr Mudavadi, saying the former deputy PM has emerged as the most senior leader from the region to propel the community to national leadership. “It is clear that Mudavadi is going for nothing less than the presidency. Our brother Oparanya is not clear on what he wants. There is no way  the two can meet as rivals,” said Mr Savula. According to the Lugari legislator, should BBI be implemented, Mr Mudavadi will likely contest the presidency against Baringo Senator Gideon Moi or Orange Democratic Movement (ODM) leader Raila Odinga, while Deputy President William Ruto will vie for the PM seat against President Uhuru Kenyatta. “Since every community is rallying behind one of its leaders, the Luhya community should stop getting confused and serving the interests of other people, rally behind Mr Oparanya as the spokesperson and remain with Mudavadi as the preferred presidential candidate.” COMMUNITY POWER Mr Murunga called on Governor Oparanya and Devolution Cabinet Secretary Eugene Wamalwa to stop serving the interests of “other people” and unite with Mr Mudavadi and Bungoma Senator Moses Wetang'ula “who put aside their political differences for the sake of unity in the Western region”. He said time has come for the Luhya community to unite and guard its votes jealously so it can determine the country’s political leadership. The community has numerical strengths which, if integrated, can cause a significant change in leadership, he said. “We should not remain a free open market where any willing politician comes for a following, which is then dumped after interests are served. We need to realise that if we come together and vote as a bloc, we can  make a difference,” said Mr Murunga. The leaders spoke in Butere Constituency on Sunday, when they accompanied Mr Mwale on a tour of development projects.