Some workers harvest plants that consist of thyme and chives, others clean and place them in crates for onward transportation to a pack house. It is a flurry of activity on the farm named Eatmo in Subukia, Nakuru County, as the global markets slowly reopens amid the Covid-19 pandemic. Three months ago, workers on the farm would harvest the produce in tonnes and dump it at a site for making manure after the global market was shut. The farm had then reduced the workforce from 35 employees to only five, but during our visit last week, 20 workers were working, some harvesting and others grading produce in the pack house. “There is great hope after resumption of cargo flights,” says Ruth Wanyoro, the company’s exporting agent. “The thyme is destined for United Kingdom, while the chives will be exported to the Netherlands,” she adds. A kilogram of thyme fetches 4.2 Euros (Sh504) and the same quantity of chives 7 Euros (Sh840). NORMAL PRICES The produce is exported under a European Union (EU) – funded project dubbed Market Access Upgrade Programme (MARKUP), which aims at connecting farmers to local, regional and international markets. It is implemented by the United Nations Industrial Development Organisation (UNIDO) in partnership with the national and county governments and the private sector. Besides herbs and spices, the project is also benefiting macadamia, groundnuts, French beans, snow peas, mango and chilli farmers. As the exports resume, stakeholders note that freight costs are a little lower than three months ago. Fresh Produce Exporters Association of Kenya chief executive Hosea Machuki says the current freight cost is about $1.8 (Sh190) – $2.3 (Sh242) per kilo. This is down from between Sh265 and Sh424 in March. “The normal prices which applied before the outbreak of Covid-19 were between Sh130 and Sh180. Although this is currently the low season for horticulture exports, we are optimistic that better days are coming.” Machuki advises farmers to prepare for the peak season which starts in October, as they observe market trends occasioned by the Covid-19 pandemic.