Property developers in Kisii municipality are rushing to put up multimillion-shilling investments following the improvement of roads and other infrastructure. The Sh8.6 billion upgrade of the Kisii-Isebania road has led to the mushrooming of shopping centres, sending the cost of land, plots and rental houses soaring. The installation of street lights along major roads leading to the municipality and the near-completion of the Sh1.5 billion Kegati water project have also helped. The near completion of the Sh1.5billion Kegati water project has also encouraged construction of residential houses because landlords will no longer have to worry about availability of water for their tenants. People who are originally from Kisii and now work and live abroad have also been investing in the region. This explains the rapid development in the rural county, that has made it the most developed in South Nyanza. Real estate agents say land prices will continue to rise because of infrastructural upgrade. Mr Robert Apepo says land is limited in Kisii and the little available will be costly. “A 50 by100 plot within Kisii municipality currently goes for over Sh5 million. We will see a spike in the prices,” said Mr Apepo. Mr Apepo noted that people who had bought land within and outside the municipality years ago are now developing it. Kisii County Governor James Ongwae says improved infrastructure and the good investor environment in the town will see more development. The County Municipal Engineer Haron Oyaro confirmed that routine maintenance of roads under Kenya Urban Roads Authority (Kura) is almost complete. The By-pass from Bobaracho-Menyinkwa to Itierio-Riamasagara is being rehabilitated. “Under the Kisii bypass phase one, there is an impressive progress as the works along Nyanchwa section-Soko Mjinga. Tarmacking is ongoing around the stadium stretch while base works are complete along Gudka and the tarmacking is soon commencing,” said Mr  Oyaro adding that access roads within the state lodge and the stadium are also underway while routine maintenance of Christa-Marriane-Menyinkwa is almost complete. There is work in progress on the box culvert at Kenonka on the road connecting Christa-Marriane -Kenonka-Nyanchwa camp centre, which is being tarmacked also under Kura. Those under the Kenya Rural Roads Authority (KeRRA) include Menyinkwa Itierio whose patch and shoulder maintenance is ongoing and Getare-Kanyimbo-Nyatieko is being gravelled. Nyanchwa, Getare, Suneka, Mosocho and Nyakoe are becoming the next destination for high-end housing developments. Cabinet Secretary for Interior and National Coordination Dr Fred Matiang’i last month made an impromptu visit in Kisii and inspected ongoing projects being done by the national government. Dr Matiang’i said he was impressed by the works that have seen Kisii town renovated, improved in its attractiveness, a position likely to attract more investors.