Unamused and firm, President Uhuru Kenyatta on Monday stated rolling back some of the freedoms handed over to Kenyans less than a month ago, accusing citizens of laxity in observing the Covid-19 prevention measures. From his body language, tone, and facial expressions, the President did not hide his displeasure with the casual manner a majority of Kenyans had taken towards the Covid-19 fight, calling out the political class and asking police to deal firmly with those breaking the law. “These are not normal times. Countries whose citizens have taken a careless or relaxed attitude have suffered greatly. Let us not follow their example,” President Kenyatta said as he read the Riot Act. He singled out bars and eateries selling alcohol as the weakest link in the Covid-19 fight as he lay grounds for stiffer measures. “Contact-tracing ... indicates that our socialising ... particularly in environments serving alcohol, is becoming a high-risk factor,” he said. Over the past few weeks, hundreds of people including political leaders have been arrested breaking curfew and health regulations. RECKLESS ACTIONS “Those are the people who have interpreted the de-escalation of the measures as a green light to pay no heed to the guidance by our health authorities. Their reckless actions are endangering those around them, and our whole country,” the President said. In the new stringent measures, President Kenyatta but ordered that all bars remain closed indefinitely, while eateries will not be allowed to serve any form of alcoholic drinks for the next 30 days. “There will be no sale of alcoholic drinks and beverages in eateries and restaurants and bars shall remain closed until further notice,” he said, adding that the closing time for restaurants and eateries has been revised from 8pm to 7pm. Inspector General of Police Hillary Mutyambai was given the arduous task of policing the stringent measures and reporting to Interior Cabinet Secretary Fred Matiang’i on the businesses that will be flouting them through a weekly status report. “The Inspector–General shall cause withdrawal of all licences for bars operating in breach of this directive. He shall also file a weekly return on all bars whose licences have been withdrawn to the Cabinet Secretary for Interior and Co-ordination of National Government,” President Kenyatta said. While addressing the nation, President Kenyatta chided the political class for being at the forefront in breaking the Covid-19 measures, leaving the citizens with little choice but to follow suit. “I laud the Nairobi Senator Johnson Sakaja for his apology and resignation for breaching the protocols. Even myself I am not above the law,” he told the virtual Fifth Extraordinary Summit of the National and County Governments that included governors and state officials. Mr Mutyambai was also directed to clamp down on the political class arguing that the rules are for everyone. SOCIAL STATUS “The Inspector General shall ensure that his officers spare no mheshimiwa, or individual, regardless of social status or rank, who is either out after curfew or who flaunts the health protocols without being an essential worker. The rules are for all of us, and rank or status does not exempt you from them,” he said. County commissioners, their deputies and the chiefs, together with police officers have also been tasked with that the national government administration officers and the National Police Service will strictly enforce the Ministry of Health protocols on public gatherings, and particularly funerals, warning them that stern action will be taken against them should compliance be compromised. “Strict personal sanction will ensue to all police and national administration officers in whose areas of jurisdiction there is a breach of the set guidelines,” President Kenyatta said. And in a sign that he will not hesitate to tighten the measures further, President Kenyatta said that he will make them more stringent, as he seeks to save lives. “If, and when, necessary, these measures will be made even more stringent. We will do this without hesitation because we hold precious the life of every Kenyan,” he said. VIRTUAL MEETING During the virtual meeting with the county chiefs, the President sought for the strict enforcement of the protocols by the respective counties, as he called for closer coordination with the respective national government administration officers. “We will expect to see the police working closely with public health officers to enforce these measures,” the President told the forum. The governors also pushed for the June and July allocations to be released by the National Treasury to enable them purchase Personal Protective Equipment (PPEs) even as they accused the Ministry of Health of misreporting on the number of isolation beds that are available in the counties. They also accused the ministry of hoarding PPEs. “I want to thank the governors for the efforts they are making. I have been encouraged to note that over 70 percent of county governments have met the set irreducible minimum we agreed on a few weeks ago,” President Kenyatta said, adding: “This is only the start. I have urged them to do more to reach full compliance and to go even further. I have promised to work with them to help keep Kenyans working and producing as much as possible during this time.” Additional reporting by Angela Oketch