With a 420 microgramme per decilitre (ug/dl) lead contamination in her blood, Irene Akinyi is the most affected resident of Owino Uhuru slums in Jomvu, Mombasa County, whose inhabitants are battling the effects of long-term exposure to the poisonous metal. Ms Akinyi’s tribulation started in early 2010, a year after a lead-smelting factory began its operations in the settlement that sits on 13.5 acres with 3,000 residents. The factory was established to collect used batteries for smelting in 2009, but was shut down in 2014 after a whistleblower and former employee — Ms Phylis Omido — accused the firm of exposing residents to lead poisoning. HIGH TEMPERATURES The company — Metal Refinery (EPZ) Ltd — was engaged in the business of recycling used batteries by smelting them at extremely high temperatures, extracting the lead components, repackaging and exporting it to external markets. Today, Ms Akinyi is ailing but, due to poverty, she cannot afford treatment. She has had difficulties getting pregnant due to the lead poisoning. “In 2015, I was tested by doctors at the Port Reitz Sub-county Hospital where it was established I had the highest lead contamination in the slum. Since then, I have been waiting for death. But I have been managing my condition by taking milk every day as recommended by doctors. The county used to give us calcium supplements but stopped after two months,” she told the Nation. Her eldest daughter, who is nine years old, has a 16.9 ug/dl contamination. Her last-born was not tested. “Doctors said they could not test her because of her condition; she has less blood. My whole family depends on drugs for survival. I have seen my village mates die but I was told by doctors that I will never conceive again until my organs get back to normal,” she said. Former deputy Chief Government Chemist, Wandera Bideru, who conducted the tests on some 50 blood samples in 2014, said in a report that the levels of lead found in the samples were shocking as they were extremely high. LANDMARK RULING The document states that some were so high that the expert did not expect the persons to be alive. The upper limit for lead presence in the blood is 5ug/dl for a child and 10ug/dl for an adult, according to the World Health Organisation. In 2016, Ms Omido moved to court on behalf of the residents seeking Sh1.6 billion as compensation. She sued the ministries of Environment and Health, the National Environment Management Authority (Nema), the Export Processing Zones Authority and Penguin Paper and Book Company for the deaths and ailments associated with lead poisoning. On Thursday last week, the Environment and Land Court ordered the government and two private investors to pay Sh1.3 billion to the residents. In the landmark ruling, Justice Ann Omollo also ordered state agencies responsible for the environment to clean up any remaining lead deposits. Ms Akinyi said their four years of waiting has at last come to an end. “We will now get money for treatment. I am optimistic, but it is too early to celebrate until we see the money in our accounts. We thank God to have won the case. It’s been a long journey full of heartache. If I get the money, I will seek treatment and move from this slum because it has caused me so much misery,” she added. The state is expected, within the next four months, to clean up the soil and water and remove any waste deposited within the settlement or pay a further Sh700 million in default. BEST PRACTICES The court further ordered the Environment and Health ministries, together with Nema, to develop and implement regulations adopted from best practices for lead and lead alloy manufacturing plants. For Jackson Wanyama, 35, whose wife Lynette Ouma died of lead poisoning in 2015, life will never be the same again. Lynette (28) who had a contamination of 278 ug/dl, died a week after giving birth at the Coast General Teaching and Referral Hospital. Her son, who is now almost five years old, was born with high levels of lead toxicity. “We had tried to conceive but my wife suffered a miscarriage at five months and another child died after two years due to the poisoning. She gave birth to our son who has 6.6 ug/dl of lead in his blood while mine is at 7.8,” he said. Lynette’s blood had the second highest lead level on the list of people tested by the government chemist. Mr Wanyama, who has since remarried, says he has contended with life’s uncertainty and is living one day at a time. “The court ruled in our favour and I am happy. But our fate will be sealed once we reach the end of the road. This is like a journey; you board a vehicle and only reach your destination when you realise you have arrived. At the moment, we are still at the bus stop. We are sad that we will never fully regain our health. We are learning to get by,” Mr Wanyama said.