On-form David Evans over the weekend scored back-to-back victories in the on-going Monthly Mugs at the par 72 Vet Lab Sports Club course. Playing off handicap six, Evans, who a week ago won the May Mug, fired three over par 75 gross for nett 69 to win the June Mug by a shot from the junior golfer Chrisphine Owuor, playing off handicap nine. Evans made a slow start at the front nine where he picked up three straight bogeys from the first hole, recovered one shot at the eighth with a birdie, then came the double at the 10th as he embarked to the back nine where he also dropped at shot at the 13th. However, birdies at the 16 and 17 with a par at the 18th was what he needed for an encouraging three over for the winning nett of 69. The young Owuor, who also dropped three shots at the outward nine, had a refreshing two club at the par four-16th for nett 70 to finish second in the A division where another junior, Krish Beiju was third on 72 nett. In the B division, Rahul Shah is still dominating the division as he fired nett 68 to beat David Nyakang’o by one shot. The former East Africa Golf Federation President, Nyakang’o round of nett 69 included a hole in one at the par four-sixth a birdie at the 16th in addition to five pars. Nicholas Koigi finished third on 71 nett, same as C division winner George Warui who beat Jeremy Kosgei on countback. In third place was Charles Kamari who posted 73 nett. Also playing in the Mug, which attracted a field of 162 players, were ladies who were led by Aashi Shah with a brilliant score of 63 nett, beating the veteran Nelius Kariuki by six shots.  One of the professionals at Vet Lab, Edwin Mudanyi shot one under par 71, a round that included four birdies and three bogeys, beating Nelson Simwa by five shots. At Ruiru Sports Club, Vice- Captain Jessy Ndegwa carded an impressive 65 nett, to win the top prize in the men’s section of the Monthly Mug, where Eliakim Maina on 66 nett was second. Paul Gichu completed the top three with a score of 68 nett. In the ladies section, Ruth Kamau beat Tabitha Kiragu on countback with a score of nett 70 to lead the ladies with Pauline Mungai finishing third on nett 73. Winning the nines were D.G.Mwangi and Benson Ndorongo with 34 nett each as Fr. Nicholas Kamau of Nyahururu was the best guest with 67 nett, while Chris Andrea playing off handicap three, shot level par 72, to claim the gross title.