Debate has been raging within the political class about a referendum to change the Constitution. Unfortunately, the discourse is driven more by politics than legal issues. Precisely, it is hinged on the 2022 elections, which makes it worse in that proposals are tied to aspirations of political aspirants. The current push for constitutional change has been linked to the Building Bridges Initiative (BBI) that came out of the “Handshake” between President Uhuru Kenyatta and Opposition Leader Raila Odinga. The two principals appointed a committee and tasked it to collect views from the public with the broad objective of providing a framework for legal and administrative changes to cure the country’s socio-political and economic fractures that perennially lead to flare-ups after elections. Now, there are two Bills in Parliament on the referendum. The first is originated by the Constitution Implementation Oversight Committee and the other by the Legal Affairs Committee. They represent different political interests, which should alarm us. There has been an argument that the Constitution has provisions that, although were intended to promote good governance, ended up marginalising communities and, therefore, inadvertently spawning ethnic hostilities. For instance, the provision on presidential election has created a situation where losers are excluded from government and national leadership. The winner forms the government and appoints loyalists to key positions. Out of this, a situation has risen where the president and their deputy (running mate) form a government only with their stalwarts, which is exclusionary and negates the principles of the Constitution. If we all agreed that the Constitution should be reviewed, the first step is to identify the contentious clauses and determine what to do with them. Second, the public should be given a chance to critically examine those issues and make informed decisions. Nonetheless, it is pertinent to posit that except for those few areas, the Constitution, by and large, is progressive and alive to human rights. Some of the issues being flagged as a threat to good governance are not. In fact, they are well catered for in law. The problem is non-implementation or deliberate violation. A case in point is the contention about inequalities in public appointments. Article 10 and Chapter Six of the Constitutions provide explicit guidelines on public appointments, emphasising fairness, equity and meritocracy. But those never count because the leaders have chosen to ignore them. Thus, the citizens should guard against schemes to change the Constitution to serve political interests. Decision to review the Constitution and areas to focus on, has to come from the citizens.