Two police officers and a driver of a miraa vehicle have been injured in Kirinyaga County after chaos erupted following a road crash which left a motorcycle rider dead. The officers and the driver suffered head and hand injuries when they were attacked by angry mob in Nyangati village on Monday. They were rushed to Kimbimbi Sub-County Hospital for treatment. Trouble started when a miraa vehicle which was heading to Nairobi from Meru hit and killed a bodaboda rider. Immediately after the crash, the residents confronted the driver and started beating him up in protest. POLICE OFFICERS INJURED But police acting on a tip-off drove to the scene and as they were rescuing the driver, the mob turned against them. The residents beat the officers with clubs and other crude weapons, injuring them seriously. It took the intervention of another contingent of security agents to save the lives of the two officers and the driver from the wrath of the attackers. During the skirmishes, one of the residents accused of being involved in the brutal attack was arrested and taken to Wang'uru Police Station. Mwea East Deputy Police Commander Luka Chebet condemned the attacks, adding that more suspects were being pursued. "All those who wounded the officers while on official duty must be arrested and prosecuted," he warned. DRIVER SAVED Mr Chebet noted that were it not for the quick intervention by the two officers, the miraa driver would have been killed. “Police acted fast and managed to save the driver from the residents who wanted to eliminate him," he said. Speaking to journalists later, the residents said they were unhappy with the many fatal accidents occasioned by reckless miraa drivers. “Several people have lost their lives and others have been maimed through accidents in this area and police are doing nothing to tame the rogue drivers," one of the residents said. RESTORE ROAD SANITY They lamented that their pleas to the government to have sanity restored along local routes have fallen on deaf ears. "We can't continue watching helplessly as miraa vehicles continue claiming the lives of our people," another resident said. Mr Chebet said the body of the rider was taken to Kerugoya Referral Hospital mortuary while the miraa vehicle was towed to Wang'uru Police Station for inspection. He warned the residents to stop taking the law into their hands. "They should have arrested the driver and handed him to the police for questioning but not to assault him," said Mr Chebet. The incident comes barely three days after another one in which residents attempted to lynch a miraa car driver in Difathas town. Police had to disperse the crowd to the rescue the driver whose vehicle had hit and seriously injured a bodaboda rider.