A manager at Astral Aviation company in Nairobi was on Monday charged with attempting to extort Sh10 million from an industrialist. Hirji Ramji Patel is accused of attempting to fraudulently obtain the money from Prashkumar Keshavji  Dodhia on July 18, 2018 as a pre-condition for helping him settle an assault case by one Dimple Sumariya. He faced another charge of being in possession of 27 rolls of bhang valued at Sh2,160 at Parklands Road in Westlands on July 17. During his arrest last Friday, the prosecution also recovered a military smoking jacket, a pair of handcuffs serial number 877034 and a bullet proof vest. The court heard that the property could only have been stolen. Police also found Mr Patel with a Kenya Airports Authority JKIA apron Badge for Astral Aviation, which expires in December, an Interior ministry identity card for community policing, a National Disaster Management Unit card and one expired Hindu Council of Kenya Security card, registration HCK S014. BAIL GRANTED Mr Patel denied four counts of extortion and being in possession of government stores and narcotic drugs. Defence lawyer David Oyatta argued for his release on bail, saying he was not a flight risk and had been assisting the needy through donations amid the Covid-10 pandemic. “Police know the city residence of the accused and his work place at the Jomo Kenyatta International Airport, and that he can’t jump bail given his immense investment,” Mr Oyatta also said. He added that his client was a recognised member of the Visa Oshwal community. Senior Principal Magistrate Kennedy Cheruiyot concurred with the lawyer, who noted that release on bail is both a constitutional and fundamental right. “The prosecution has not offered compelling reasons to warrant the accused's bail denial,” Mr Cheruiyot said. The manager was freed on Sh1 million cash bail, the court saying the Director of Public Prosecution, through State prosecutor Kennedy Panyako, did not give compelling reasons for his continued detention. Mr Cheruiyot ordered the accused supplied with witness statements and exhibits. The case will be mentioned on August 3 and pre-trial directions given.