Coast leaders have accused ODM leader Raila Odinga of betraying them over his stand on the proposed revenue sharing formula and parliamentary jobs. The lawmakers on Thursday stated that despite their unwavering political support to the Orange party over the years, they have been constantly neglected and left on their own on important national issues. Addressing the press at Parliament Buildings yesterday, 10 MPs led by Kilifi North MP Owen Baya said it’s time to severe links with ODM. They are Mohammed Ali (Nyali), Michael Kingi (Magarini), Aisha Jumwa (Malindi), Sharif Ali (Lamu East), Andrew Mwadime (Mwatate), Khatib Mwashetani (Lunga Lunga), Jones Mlolwa (Voi) Paul Katana (Kaloleni) and Benjamin Tayari (Kinango). The MPs said the decision by ODM to support the revenue sharing formula that if adopted would see Mombasa County lose Sh513 million, Kwale (Sh1.213 billion), Kilifi (Sh1.192 billion), Tana River (Sh458 million) and Taita-Taveta (Sh388 million) is a clear demonstration of betrayal by Mr Odinga. They pointed an accusing finger at four MPs from Nyanza who voted for the new formula, hence denying the Coast more money. SELFISH VOTES “We take political notice of the party-guided and choreographed votes of senators Fred Outa (Kisumu), James Orengo (Siaya), Moses Kajwang’ (Homa Bay) and Ochilo Ayacko (Migori) and wish to tell them that their selfish votes may be celebrated at home because they were an attempt to save BBI and millions of shillings as benefits of the handshake, but will have far-reaching political consequences,” Mr Baya said.  “ODM senators from Luo Nyanza threw us under the bus and left us on the horns of despair. Thanks to our fellow marginalised brothers and sisters we survived the vote,” he added. The MPs termed the rejection of the amended proposed revenue sharing formula as a historic win, saying had it been adopted, it would have widened the gap of marginalisation in the country. “We know the war is not over yet as the committee report and formula are yet to be put to the final vote. However, we celebrate this victory alongside other historically marginalized regions who stood firm against their party positions to side with the people,” Mr Baya said. Mr Mwashetani said they are ripe for a shift ahead of 2022, adding that they will no longer play second fiddle to anyone. Mr Sharif regretted that the party they had supported for a long time had turned its back against them at their time of need. Nyali’s Mohammed Ali said in 2022, Coast people will have a presidential candidate on the ballot and will not offer any support to anyone. “We will not accept any more empty stories and fairy tales. We will give a clear direction soon,” Mr Ali added. Malindi MP Aisha Jumwa, who ODM is planning to axe from the lucrative Parliamentary Service Commission, said it will no longer be business as usual with the Orange party.