Former Olympics 3,000m steeplechase silver medalist Ben Jipcho has been hospitalized in Fountain Hospital in Eldoret, Uasin Gishu County. According to his daughter Ruth Jipcho, Ben has been unwell for some time and is currently admitted at the Intensive Care Unit (ICU). “Our father has been sick for a while and he is currently admitted at the Fountain Hospital in ICU. We are praying that he gets better soon,” said Ruth. Ruth told Nation Sport that the doctor attending to Jipcho said his condition has worsened due to kidney, lungs and liver failure. “We are just praying for him because the doctor told us his organs (kidney, liver and lungs) have failed and we are just praying that his condition will improve,” said Ruth. Last week, Ben developed blockage in his stomach and was rushed to Crystal Hospital in Kitale after which he was referred to Eldoret after his condition worsened. “He has been in good health but he recently developed blockage in his stomach. The doctor referred us to a hospital in Eldoret where he has been for the last three days and the doctors are attending to him,” said Ruth. Former 1,500m All Africa Games champion Susan Sirma said that she was praying for Jipcho whom they interacted on many occasions during her athletics career. “We are praying for Jipcho to be well because he is one of our fathers in terms of athletics in our country. I was in the hospital to see him and I wish him quick recovery,” said Sirma. Athletics Kenya president Jack Tuwei sent his wishes to the family saying the former athlete has rich history terming him as one of the athletics pioneers. “As a federation we want to wish Jipcho quick recovery after being hospitalized in Eldoret. He is one of the athletics fathers and he has rich history. We are praying for him and the family at this time,” said Tuwei. Jipcho started his athletics career in the 60s and will be remembered as one of the first unofficial pacemakers after sacrificing chances of winning a medal to his compatriot Kipchoge Keino in the 1,500m race during the 1968 Olympics Games. In 1970, Jipcho won a silver medal in the 3,000m steeplechase at the Edinburgh Commonwealth Games before settling second at the 1972 Olympic Games held in Munich where he also participated in the 3,000m steeplechase. In 1973, he participated in the All Africa Games in Lagos, Nigeria where he enrolled for two races bagging gold medals in the 5,000m and 3,000m steeplechase. In 1974 he bagged gold medals in the 5,000m and 3,000m steeplechase races and a bronze medal in the 1,500m race during the Commonwealth Games in Christchurch in New Zealand.