The County Assemblies’ Forum has moved to constitutional court for intervention after President Uhuru Kenyatta signed into law a Bill to recall misbehaving ward representatives. The County Government Amendment Bill 2017, which the Senate passed on April 21 and in the National Assembly on June 30, was sponsored by Elgeyo-Marakwet Senator Kipchumba Murkomen. President Kenyatta assented to the Bill on July 9. Apart from misbehaving inside and outside the assembly precincts, the MCAs also risk losing their seats if they violate the constitution, or any other law, incompetence, gross misconduct or if convicted of an offence punishable by imprisonment for at least six months. The national chairperson of the forum, Wahome Ndegwa who is also the Speaker of the Nyandarua County Assembly said the Bill is “discriminatory” and that is why the forum has decided to seek for a constitutional interpretation on some controversial clauses of the Bill. “We have made a decision to move to constitutional court for intervention and our main concern is that the requirement that the court should verify the legitimacy of the petition for recall of MCAs has been removed,” said Mr Ndegwa. POKED HOLES At the same time, Mr Ndegwa poked holes on the Bill saying it is “discriminatory as it makes it very easy to recall an MCA but makes it impossible to recall a Senator or a Member of Parliament or a Woman Representative.” He argued that there is no explanation as to why that clause which has been there in the County Government Act and in particular section 27 that explicitly states that for recall of MCAs to be effective, the petition must be verified by the High Court. “It is against this background that we want to know why that critical clause in the dispensation of fair justice has been revisited,” said Mr Ndegwa. He pointed out that most of the Speakers in the 47 counties were not aware of the Bill in the spirit of public participation as enshrined in the constitution. “We are the main stakeholders because the Speakers are also MCAs. Public participation must have been very poorly done,” said Mr Ndegwa. The officials said the forum is optimistic it will get favourable orders from the constitutional court stopping the operationalisation of the Bill. “Our prayers as County Assemblies Forum is for the constitutional court to stop the operationalisation of the law until it is clearly interpreted,” said Mr Ndegwa. CAUSED JITTERS The Bill has caused jitters among the more than 3,400 MCAs across the 47 counties. In Nakuru, former Majority Leader Stanley Karanja, who is also Naivasha Ward Representative, said many MCAs were not conversant with the new Bill. “This is a serious law that requires lawyers to break it down and interpret it to MCAs so that we can be able to know what it entails because it seems the authority of people will be usurped and overturned by only 30 percent,” said Mr Karanja He added: “This law has reduced MCAs to annexures, footnotes and appendages of the constitution that anything can happen anytime, anywhere and anyhow. Elgeyo-Marakwet Senator has decided to throw us under the bus.” He urged Speaker Joel Kairu Maina to arrange for a forum where lawyers will speak to the MCAs on the Bill implications. “I will make the copies of the new Bill available and since we have lawyers in assembly they will advise us accordingly,” said Speaker Kairu.