The Public Service Commission (PSC) has scaled down operations to minimise the spread of coronavirus after 10 employees tested positive. Acting Health Director-General Patrick Amoth Tuesday said the action would also ensure social distance among staff. “We will take measures in government institutions to ensure that we limit further spread of the virus,” Dr Amoth said. PSC Chief Executive Simon Rotich said targeted testing showed that 10 workers had the virus. The commission said work would be scaled down for 14 days, effective July 13 and that access to the offices would be restricted. “In this regard, staff and interns will be required to proceed for self-isolation. During this period, access to commission offices will be restricted except where there is prior clearance,” Mr Rotich said in a memo to the workers. STATE HOUSE EMPLOYEES The confirmation of the cases comes weeks after at least State House employees tested positive for the virus. After that, State House said all the staff at Harambee House would be tested from time to time. President Uhuru Kenyatta suspended physical engagements as top State House officials implemented a restricted access policy, with most briefings being done via Skype. Only critical ones like intelligence briefs are happening physically but in a controlled environment. ESSENTIAL STAFF To decongest the President’s official residence, most of the essential staff now operate from a number of government offices spread across Community area. They include NHIF and NSSF buildings. Older employees at Mr Kenyatta’s office, as is the case with other civil servants, are working from home. Meanwhile, Huduma Centres have announced temporary closure of some offices in Nairobi for fumigation. This is as the number of Covid-19 continues to rise daily with the government announcing the highest spike in a single day on Tuesday. The Health ministry announced 497 new Covid-19 cases, the biggest daily rise so far, taking the nationwide tally to 10,791. The positive cases represent a worrying 10 percent of the total number of 4922 samples collected. Another five people succumbed from the virus over the past 24 hours.