Mutua ‘campaign platform’ Prof Makau Mutua should stop using his column as a political campaign platform. Most Kenyans who follow him every Sunday must have noticed his inclination to pour vitriol on those politicians he believes are a threat to a cause that he overtly advocates and to leaders he believes are the right ones to lead this country. This is okay as we are in a democracy. What is, however, not okay is the way he uses his column to campaign for a particular leader while ridiculing the ones he despises. In his article “Raila ranks at the top of the pyramid of Kenyan patriots” (Sunday Nation, July 12, 2020), Prof Mutua went overboard in his defence of Raila Odinga. Kenyans know Raila is a true Second Liberation hero. After the March 2018 ‘Handshake’ with President Uhuru Kenyatta, most Kenyans, especially his supporters, thought he had sold out to the regime or, as Kenyans say, “eaten ugali”. Others saw themselves as opposition ‘orphans’ because the man they viewed as the true oppositionist moved the goal posts. We all agree with Prof Mutua that Raila has political choices to make. What he should tell us is that most political parties in Kenya are built around individual politicians and are always houses built on sand. He should advocate political parties built on firm democratic beliefs and worthy political causes. It is true Raila made the move for the sake of tranquility. While defending who he supports, Prof Mutua should also know those who he attacks every Sunday also have their rights and they need his defence too. — David Kigo, Nairobi * * * Campaign news They say you cannot wage a war with the ‘Fourth Estate’. Who am I to deviate from that celebrated maxim? One can only raise an issue hoping it will prick their conscience. Kenyans are going through hell with retrenchments, coronavirus, closed schools, curfew, et cetera. Yet there’s an emerging trend in the mainstream media, presumably due to commercial urge. They’re feeding us too much of Mount Kenya succession politics, Ruto’s 2022 agenda, western Kenya politics. The situation can only get murkier with BBI and, perhaps, referendum. People have a right to information, but is this the time to ship emotions and put people on a 2022 campaign mode? — David Okello * * * Legacy versus social media I want to weigh in on the legacy media versus social media debate. When did the legacy media start losing out? As in Kenya, politicians in India dominated the media space for a long time, aided by editors who were hostage to the political class. The editors didn’t bother to address the needs of the Indian news consumers and continued their obsession with politics and politicians. The consumers got fed up and stopped buying newspapers and tuning to electronic media that placed politicians and political news first. The Indian consumer was keener on economic as opposed to political news. Today, if you take a sample of newspapers in India, you’ll notice the vast majority have economic news as their headlines with political news relegated to inside pages. In the case of Kenya, I know a large group of people who no longer buy newspapers and watch news very selectively, avoiding political news where possible. I believe a large group of consumers (possibly the majority) are fed up with politicians and political news. That is possibly why sales and viewership has been on the decline. The coronavirus crisis only exacerbated the situation. It’s high time NMG undertook a survey to find out what consumers want and why a large number has stopped patronising legacy media products. — Mike Johan * * * Naming names I refer to the investigative piece by John Kamau, “When rats ate pyrethrum worth Sh2.4bn and other shameful tales on pyrethrum” (Sunday Nation, July 12, 2020). What’s the point of investing time and effort in researching and writing an investigative piece if you can’t even have the guts to mention names? There were managers, including the CEO of the Pyrethrum Board of Kenya, responsible for running the company and could have been involved in the looting. Did you interview any of them and follow the money trail? How could you not even mention who was the CEO, financial controller, chief accountant or any of the directors when the company was looted? Would revealing the names of office holders really expose the Nation to liability? Perhaps you should read investigative reports in publications such as the New York Times, Propublica, Center for Public Integrity and The Center for Investigative Reporting for guidance. Please don’t short-change readers. — Biggy Chaka * * * Sickly photo I am dissatisfied with the use of the photo of Ohangla songbird Maureen Achieng’ taken at her deathbed (Daily Nation, July 13, 2020, page 11). Why use a photo of hers when she is very sick? You must pick your photos carefully. Journalism must maintain the dignity of those they cover. — Gideon Onduru Ayieko The Public Editor is an independent news ombudsman who handles readers’ complaints on editorial matters, including accuracy and journalistic standards. Email: publiceditor@ke.nationmedia.com. Call or text 0721989264.