In the 1996 movie Independence Day, starring the one and only “entanglement” bro, Will Smith depicting a very brave, cigar-chomping fighter jockey Captain Steven Hiller, Bill Pullman (as US leader Whitmore Thomas) delivers a stirring speech to humanity, assembled to launch a desperate counterattack against vicious alien invaders. The aliens have come to clean the earth of human vermin. And here is that speech, which I have quoted from an article in People magazine: “Good morning. In less than an hour, aircraft from here will join others from around the world. And you will be launching the largest aerial battle in the history of mankind. “‘Mankind’. That word should have new meaning for all of us today. We can’t be consumed by our petty differences anymore. We will be united in our common interests. Perhaps it’s fate that today is the Fourth of July, and you will once again be fighting for our freedom … Not from tyranny, oppression, or persecution … but from annihilation. We are fighting for our right to live. To exist. “And should we win the day, the Fourth of July will no longer be known as an American holiday, but as the day the world declared in one voice: ‘We will not go quietly into the night! We will not vanish without a fight! We’re going to live on! We’re going to survive!” LOST JOBS That is the spirit of what I want to write about this Friday. The only difference is that I am not addressing humanity, but the massed ranks of journalists who have lost their jobs, gone for months on half pay and looking at the annihilation of their careers, their institutions and their role in society. How did we get here? Well, there are external factors and internal factors. For the past seven years or so, the operating environment has been harsh. Punitive taxes, the fight to tie government advertising to favourable coverage and a less advertising spend from the public purse. In other countries, governments are bailing out their cultural industry and pillars of civil society. In Kenya, there is laughter and happiness in some corridors or power at our predicament. Internally, we are slow to change. We think very well, strategically, but endlessly. Our execution, as a profession and outside of news projects, is generally crap. The bulk of the Nation digital transformation strategy was done in 2007 or thereabout. Ever since, we have generally been going round it like a bunch of pagans around a ‘holy’ rock. PROCRASTINATION As a result of procrastination, technology got ahead of us and our customers pulled away. So we are left clutching yellowing newsprint and reporting outdated stories in fixed time slots while the world is moving in real time, connected, uploading and downloading information at the speed of thought, to quote some guy. We are stuck in our extinction-attracting ways while the corporations for which we work are wedded to their bottomlines. And so we have gone to the wire; we are at the very brink of annihilation. For survival, we have had to learn quickly. Even though we are slow to change, journalists quickly large amounts of information and are able to apply it to decision-making. But in order for that information to be of any use, we have to unlearn the habits of a lifetime: Our fondness for structures, roles, positions, pecking orders, workplace territories and empires. We have to learn to invite situations where we work with others to deliver quickly. Secondly, in letting go of our beloved institutions and structures, we have to become insurgent: Quick, nimble, ruthlessly efficient and non-institutional. We have to get used to holding the ladder and changing the bulb at the same time. There is a tired joke that when a journalist is given a new assignment, the first thing they say is: “Give me a team.” You are the team. DIGITAL SPACES We are coming in hordes, swarms and herds to new digital spaces. We are going to part the old, soiled skins of social media and we are going to set up shop there, allowing in some fresh air and light. Let our method of verification, diligence, fact checking, balance, integrity and responsibility compete with the rumour mongers, quacks and the mouths for hire. But the most important change of all is that we are going where it all started. In the old days, newspapers lived off the fellows who shelled out a few coins to buy a copy. A bond of honour was born that way: The editor would move worlds to get the information that the man with the coin needed. But with time, change came and the advertiser started paying the bills. Organisations went to great lengths to build walls of steel separating their editorial and commercial operations as a way of respecting that old promise. They did not always succeed. Finally, we can serve only one primary boss — that humble working man with the coin. We are going to live on. We are going to survive. mmutuma@ke.nationmedia.com.