I was in the CBD recently and we decided to pop into the Galitos Building on Moi Avenue because it’s just so conveniently located, but since it has several restaurants inside, we were a little unsure on what to eat. So as not to crowd the space, we stepped back outside only to be swarmed by street children begging for money. We went back in and decided that probably the cheapest place to order from would be Chicken Inn. There was a security guard at the door, and the restaurants in this space are doing good in monitoring that people keep the 1.5m distance. The guard, who was very friendly, told my sister and I to keep a 1.5m distance as that was the policy. This actually made no sense since we come from the same house, sit on the same couch watching TV because we have nowhere to go and nothing much to do with schools and jobs closed, plus we cook in the same kitchen every day...you catch my drift. What was keeping a 1.5m distance from one another going to do to protect us from the virus, or to protect other people from us? I was also the one paying and these restaurants have the menus on the wall behind the counter, and we needed to discuss what to get and work out costs. We got our two pieces of chicken and chips at Sh 300 each, and then because our inhibitions had already gone out of the window, we walked to the creamy inn counter and got strawberry ice creams for Sh100 each. This brought back memories of my campus days when if I needed to meet up with any friends, we would just meet in front of this building then order cheerfully cheap and delightful cones of ice cream. Having decided to eat in the restaurant, we went upstairs and found a table before one of the women who worked there came to tell us that we needed to sit at different tables. Is it just me or is this 1.5m distance policy completely out of order for people who live together? Imagine going to the supermarket with your husband or child and being told you need to keep your distance from each other. It makes sense for strangers to observe distance...but people who live in the same house? Come on! Needless to say, we obliged, and sat at different tables. The food at Chicken Inn, as usual, didn’t disappoint. These guys have mastered the science of marinating, coating and deep frying chicken. The Creamy Inn ice cream brought back many memories as well. It was lovely looking at the buses going past Hilton and watching people going about their day. If you’re in the CBD and need a convenient space to grab some fast food, this is a good spot to consider. Send your feedback to satmag@ke.nationmedia.com