Until Enable declares otherwise, she is still extremely keen to carry on competing, and breaking records in the King George VI and Queen Elizabeth Qipco Stakes, on Saturday. A small quality batch of rivals, are not letting her off Scott-free. But no other horse has achieved this fete, so, fingers are crossed everywhere for the grand dame of racing, who's ideal is to make it three for the Qatar Prix de l'Arc de Triomphe. Enable only went wayward behind Ghayyaith in the Coral-Eclipse, but she is working well at home, with improvements each session. Thady Gosden believes he has her peaking for the King George. Of course, Aiden O'Brien-Coolmore, can pack a punch with Japan (Ryan Moore 3-1), Antrhony Van Dyke (Oisin Murphy 9-1), and, Sovereign William Buick 11-1). Now then. Lanfranco Dettori, 49, is actually looking to equal the most talked about jockey of all time, Sir Lester Piggott, in this race, on seven juicy wins - Njinsky included.  Lanfranco remains as a current best, but Enable, owned by Khalid Abdullah, is his absolute date of the century. No spectators are being let in to encourage Enable, but apparently, they will be allowed on the finals of Glorious Goodwood. *** Veteran rider, Irad Ortiz, Junior smashed the Saratoga Springs program, in unique fashion, when five of his eight engagements, came good. He is now second in the ratings with brother, Jose Ortiz. Joel Rosario is a point better. His tally from Thomas Shelby, Fresco, Irish Front, Bertranda, and, Admiral Lynch, were for different trainers. Fun fact. Irad also handled five winners a year ago at Saratoga Springs. *** Going further afield, Pink Lloyd (Rafael Hernandez 4-9), continued to add more trophies to his already crazy collection, when bouncing past Silent Jimmie, Dun Drum, and, Not So Quiet, in the $100,000 Shepperton Stakes, Toronto. This was Pink Lloyd's third strike here for Robert Tiller, stopping the clock at 1:16:4/10 seconds. They say he is the finest sprinter in Canada for five decades. But it was not a clear run. He did encounter plenty obastacles along the way, which Rafii was able to negotiate. An eight-year-old son of Old Forester, owned by the Entourage Stable, Pink Llyod has accumulated 24 career wins, almost reaching $2 million in earnings.