Indefatigable world marathon record holder Eliud Kipchoge has made another passionate appeal to corporates to come to the aid of vulnerable sportspeople affected by the coronavirus pandemic. Kipchoge continued his food distribution mission to athletes in Nandi County with 100 athletes benefiting from his drive on Friday. The distance running legend is now heading towards the 1,000 mark in the number of athletes and other vulnerable locals to whom he has handed relief items. The Olympic marathon champion has been on the relief mission for three months now. The Youth Engagement Society partnered with the legend’s Eliud Kipchoge Foundation with 30 women also benefiting from sanitary pads.  Kipchoge said that the pandemic “has made the human being to crawl all the way” and giving food athletes and reusable pads to women in the region is a “useful initiative.” “The virus has really brought us to our knees, especially the athletes who have been depending on competitions to earn a living. “Many are suffering. It’s tough life, especially training in an empty stomach,” said Kipchoge. He further said that it’s time people learnt to live with the virus by following government’s public health directives in order to remain safe. “The virus seems to be staying longer with us.  I would want to urge athletes and the general public to continue following the government’s directive as we wait for it to be contained. He urged corporates to come on board and donate something small within this period. “I’m still asking corporate companies to give a helping hand to the sports men and women at this hard times because the situation is not permanent,” added Kipchoge. Nandi County sports executive, Elly Kurgat, asked more stakeholders to chip in and help the athletes who are suffering during this period because all the races were cancelled this year. Central Rift Athletics Kenya chairman Abraham Mutai said that there are still in discussion to see how athletes will further benefit from relief food distribution. “We started with cushioning junior athletes and there are discussions ongoing to see how other athletes will be reached, especially those vulnerable during these hard time of Covid-19,” said Mutai.