NMS Director-General Mohamed Badi has defended his administration against accusations of militarising the capital. Mr Badi told off Governor Mike Sonko over their constant feuds, the most recent one being over the former mayor’s residence in Lavington. He said the Nairobi Metropolitan Services has 7,500 personnel, with only six from the military and seconded to the new outfit by the Kenya Defence Council. “Each and every officer in the NMS has been seconded. We did not propose or come here by ourselves,” he noted. “The other officers are recruited by the Public Service Commission. If only six of the 7,500 personnel are military officers, do you call that militarisation?” POLITICS On the contested governor’s residence, Mr Badi accused Sonko of politicising the matter, saying that prior to NMS’ repossession of the property, it had been vacant for over two years. He said the governor only claimed it after the agency announced its intent to renovate all county houses and reposses grabbed public land. “The Lavington residence is not the only house we are repairing. There are several others. Why Sonko decided (to feud) over that one I do not know. I cannot answer [questions] on his behalf,” said Mr Badi. THE FEUD The tussle between the two began last Tuesday after Governor Sonko announced that he had repossessed the former mayor’s residence after it was surrendered by the Ethics and Anti-Corruption Commission (EACC). He announced plans to renovate the house for it to serve as the official residence of the governor. But Maj. Gen Badi warned the City Hall boss against going into the property, saying it is now under tight security. He, however, pointed out that the governor can move into the residence after the renovations are completed. Mr Badi said, “We are taking up all county houses that are dilapidated. We want to build them so that more staff will have more housing. If he (Sonko) wants to enter it, he should wait for us to rebuild it. After all, it belongs to the county.” COVID-19 WAR Meanwhile, NMS has announced a raft of measures it is implementing in Nairobi in the fight against the Covid-19 pandemic. NMS Director of Health Services, Dr Josephine Mbae, said A makeshift facility at Mbagathi Hospital, with 160 beds, should be ready by next week. Another 20 beds have been added at the same hospital while renovation blocks A and B will yield another 78, 10 of them for the Intensive Care Unit. The county, which has been the virus epicenter, had 10,575 positive cases and 134 deaths as of July 27. Dr Mbae further said they are in the process of procuring items for a 70-bed facility, as well as 18 ICU beds, within the new block at Mama Lucy Hospital. “We are also in the process of setting up makeshift facilities with 100 beds at Mutuini Hospital and a 400-bed facility at Kasarani centre,” she said. For those not able to self-isolate, the NMS has set aside KMTC’s Mary Griffin hostel which has 90 beds, St Georges High School which has 400 beds and Moi Girls’, which has 400 beds. Other centres are being set up in Nairobi School, Upper Hill, Kenya High school and Dagoretti High School.