National Assembly Speaker Justin Muturi has slammed politicians for holding meetings despite rising Covid-19 cases, saying it is “reckless and irresponsible". Mr Muturi said on Tuesday that the leaders must shelve the gatherings due to increasing community transmission of the deadly virus. “We live in extraordinary times where the risk of infection and community transmission due to contact with people in large gatherings is high. To add to the uncertainty around the virus is the fact that there is no known cure for the disease. Politicians should stop holding large gatherings to reduce this risk,” he said. “It is utterly irresponsible for any leader to fail to appreciate the kind of situation we are in as a country and as a planet. The only available defence against the pandemic is for each of us to follow the preventive measures advised by the Ministry of Health,” he added. The Speaker reminded politicians, religious leaders and other opinion shapers that holding such gatherings is a violation of the law. “We should get alternative methods of communicating with the people we represent. Please do not risk their lives,”  Mr Muturi said. As of July 21, about five months since detecting the virus locally, Kenya had 14,168 confirmed cases and 250 deaths. The Speaker said MPs who also benefit from the Jubilee Insurance medical cover were expected to be part of the facility’s clientele. SPECIALTY CLINIC Speaker Muturi spoke at the opening of the Aga Khan University Hospital’s Peponi Executive and Specialty Clinic in Westlands, Nairobi. The facility, AKU’s 49th outreach clinic that cost Sh59 million, will provide services including family medicine, skin care, child or paediatric care, diabetes management as well as obstetric and gynaecological care. Aga Khan University Hospital chief executive, Dr Shawn Bolouki, said the clinic is part of the healthcare service provider’s drive to expand its reach within the county. “Our aim is to increase access to services. This clinic shall provide a one-stop setting for our patients to receive care from consultants, with different specialties including surgery, paediatrics, oncology, family medicine, gynecology and obstetrics, dental care, plastic surgery and hematology,” said Dr Bolouki. “The clinic also doubles up as a wellness centre where people will be able to do their annual medical checkups as well as prerequisite medical examinations,” he added. HIGH STANDARDS While noting that the hospital’’s laboratory is certified by the College of American Pathologists, Dr Bolouki said it is committed to ensuring quality care in line with international standards. “We recognise your doctor is as good as the diagnostic test results given to them. We therefore highly prioritise quality diagnostics and continue to invest in the latest technology and expertise. This clinic will receive the support of our world class diagnostics centres to ensure quality, accurate and timely diagnosis,” he said. So far, the hospital’s laboratory is the only one in East Africa to hold that certification. In July 2013, the facility was the first in East Africa to be accredited by the Joint Commission International, an international healthcare standards group headquarters in Chicago, USA. It was re-accredited in July 2016 and July 2019 during an assessment that takes place every three years. Dr Bolouki said the cost of services at the executive clinic include a Sh6,000 fee for consultations, with those paying in cash expected to part with Sh500-1,000 for some basic services. “Our mobile laboratory service as well as home delivery of medications will also be available for the convenience of our patients, at no extra cost,” he said.