Eating a balanced diet could boost your chances of surviving a Covid-19 attack the Health ministry said yesterday, as the country’s case load inched towards the 7,000 mark. Healthy eating is especially important for patients with underlying conditions such as diabetes and hypertension, according to Health Chief Administrative Secretary Rashid Aman. He said a balanced diet is very critical for preventing and managing non-communicable diseases and their complications during the Covid-19 season and beyond. HEALTHY DIET “Those who adhere to a healthy diet are able to maintain the acceptable blood sugar level, manage their blood pressure levels and maintain the ideal body weight,” he said. Dr Aman urged vulnerable groups to eat the right portion of whole grains and cereals, including cassava and potatoes, along with plenty of fruits. “Eat a lot of vegetables, including traditional vegetables, carrots, proteins, and take low fat dairy products,” he said. But he warned people to avoid alcohol, sodas and energy drinks, and also to reduce sugar and salt intake. Thursday, the country recorded 268 cases (160 males and 108 females) after testing 2,704 samples, bringing the national case load to 6,941 from the cumulative 176,059 samples tested. There were 259 Kenyans and nine foreigners. The youngest was a year old while the oldest was 80. The cases were in 11 counties, with Nairobi leading with 175 cases, Mombasa (28), Busia (18), Kiambu (11), with Kajiado and Migori recording nine cases each. Machakos had six, Narok two, while Makueni and Murang’a recorded a case each. In Nairobi, the cases were in Dagoretti North (38), Kibra (29), Ruaraka (24), Langata (21), Embakasi East (12), Westlands (10), Makadara (10), Starehe seven, Kasarani six with Embakasi South and West recording five cases each. Embakasi Central three cases, while Embakasi North, Kamukunji, Mathare and Roysambu recorded two cases each. Mombasa’s cases were in Kisauni (12), Mvita 6), Jomvu (four), Nyali (three), Changamwe (two) with Likoni recording a case. In Busia, the cases were in Teso South (12), Teso North (five) and Matayos , one case. In Kiambu, the cases were in Kiambu Town (seven), Riuru (two) with Juja and Thika recording a case each. Kajiado North had six, Kajiado East (2) s and Loitokitok a case. In Migori, Kuria East, West and Suna recorded three cases. Meanwhile, 20 patients were discharged, bringing the total recoveries 2,109.  But three died, bringing the total fatalities to 152.