A Nairobi court has ordered the Director of Criminal Investigations George Kinoti to personally arrest a police detective handling the Sh39 billion fake military tender involving former Cabinet secretary Rashid Echesa. Senior Principal Magistrate Kenneth Cheruiyot on Wednesday amended his earlier order that had directed the Nairobi County commander to arrest Police Constable John Munjama, who is the case investigating officer. The officer is wanted for failing to release Mr Echesa’s motor vehicle and two firearms as directed by the court last month, in an order that was upheld by the High Court while dismissing a revision application by the Director of Public Prosecutions (DPP). In the application, the DPP had said the properties were being detained pending the trial of the criminal case and further investigations by the police. PC Munjama told court that the police suspect that the motor vehicle was unlawfully acquired, hence justification for its continued detention. NO LEGAL JUSTIFICATION On the firearms, he said it was to enable the chairman of the Firearms Licensing Bureau to verify the particulars of the said guns before releasing the same to the former CS. But Justice Luka Kimaru said from the submission made by the parties, it is clear that the detention of the firearms and the motor vehicle is unconnected with the pending criminal case. “As correctly observed by the trial magistrate, there is no nexus or connection between the said motor vehicle and the pending charges before that court. There is no legal justification for the continued detention of the said motor vehicle. The same should therefore be returned to the respondent without further ado,” ruled Justice Luka Kimaru on July 8. The two firearms are registered as of make P-Barreta FO 92 and make Ceska while the car is a Range Rover, KCR 786H. Mr Echesa, through lawyer Evans Ondieki, returned to the magistrate court complaining that the officer was yet to comply with the order, and as a result the magistrate issued the warrant of arrest to be effected by the chief detective. The magistrate directed Mr Kinoti to produce the officer in court for sentencing because of contempt. The case will be mentioned on August 7.