Amani National Congress leader Musalia Mudavadi and his Ford-Kenya counterpart Moses Wetang’ula have vowed not to work with the Jubilee administration, claiming it has wrecked the economy. Speaking at the home of Nambale MP John Bunyasi in Busia County, the two leaders yesterday vowed to mobilise the Western region into voting as a bloc behind a Luhya presidential candidate in 2022. Mr Mudavadi said his bid for the presidency remains unstoppable and told President Kenyatta to stop courting ANC. “They have messed the economy that former President Mwai Kibaki had streamlined,” said Mr Mudavadi. “Now they want to involve us in their government so that we are seen to be part of the mess. I cannot accept to be part of bad leadership.” LUHYA CANDIDATE He asked the Head of State to complete his tenure and hand him the leadership mantle in 2022. They called on ODM leader Raila Odinga to reciprocate the support he has enjoyed from the region by supporting a Luhya candidate. “We are tired of carrying people on our shoulders and time is ripe for them to reciprocate,” said Mr Wetang’ula. “Mudavadi supported Raila in 2007. In 2017, he shelved his desires for the presidency and supported Raila again. Raila should appreciate this community by supporting one of us,” said Mr Wetang’ula. The Bungoma senator asked the youth to register as voters in large numbers. “We shall agree with Mudavadi on who shall carry the region’s flag to State House,” he said. The two sought blessings from elders and religious leaders. Mr Wetang’ula condemned the Jubilee administration for “sidelining” the region, saying the Jomo Kenyatta, Moi and Kibaki governments did better for Western Kenya. Mr Mudavadi said he won’t repeat the mistake he did in 2002 when he was approached to be a presidential candidate, but refused because he was supporting Mr Kenyatta. “We moved around in choppers campaigning across the country. This made me lose the Sabatia parliamentary seat which I had won for several years,” he recalled. The ANC leader condemned the rising tendency of police disrupting meetings by leaders who are opposed to the government, saying “Kenya is a free state and everybody is free to associate with others”. “Strange things are happening that are an assault to democracy. Because of political stands, people are being threatened by the police, others are tear-gassed while others are being called to record statements. This is not the Kenya we want,” Mr Mudavadi added. DESIRED DEVELOPMENT He also took issue with the government for setting up an Internal Container Depot at Naivasha, claiming this had affected the economy of border towns. The leaders took issue with Devolution Cabinet Secretary Eugene Wamalwa and governors from Western region, accusing them of being “musketeers in the Jubilee administration”. “Why should governors go kneeling before the President in the pretext of asking for development when they have their governments to initiate the desired development projects?” posed Mr Bunyasi. Lugari MP Ayub Savula said Mudavadi and Wetang’ula are the only leaders from region who qualify to contest the presidency. The meeting was also attended by Sabatia MP Alfred Agoi, Chris Wamalwa (Kiminini), Ferdinand Wanyonyi (Kwanza), Titus Khamala (Lurambi), Beatrice Adagala (Vihiga County) and ANC chairman Kelvin Lunani.