When the British colonisers set foot in what is now known as Kenya, they found over 40 different communities living with existing rules and regulations that ensured that the communities lived in harmony, and a clear justice mechanism for offenders. Some communities such as the Ameru had the Njuri Ncheke that deliberated over serious crimes. The Kikuyu had capital punishment for murderers and major sexual offenders, who were bound and left in the wild to die of exposure. The Maasai and Kamba had compensation in form of cattle if one was found guilty of murder. These systems of justice were easily accessible to all; they were fair, in that all offenders were given the same punishment dependent on the crime, and irrespective of how wealthy or powerful the wrong doer was in the community. But the British colonisers brought with them their concept of wrong doing and their ways of justice and retribution. These entailed their laws, police officers and courts. We have retained these long after independence. UNEQUAL TREATMENT But if recent happenings are anything to go by, it is clear these imported forms of justice are not only inaccessible and unaffordable to most Kenyans, they are also unfair and confer unequal treatment. Senator Johnson Sakaja was found breaking the curfew and was arrested. He denied having been arrested, then went on a public relations spree to clean up his image. He resigned from an ad hoc committee and apologised while taking himself to court. In the end, he was fined Sh15,000. Meanwhile, the average Kenyan caught breaking curfew rules by the police will be bundled into a quarantine centre to spend 14 days, initially at their own cost. And that’s for the lucky ones; the unlucky ones will lose their lives at the hands of police officers. Mr Sakaja isn't the only leader or rich person to get an unfair bargain when they commit crimes. Generally, the law in Kenya just doesn't apply to our elected leaders. To date, Mercy Keino's murder case has never been resolved while Migori Governor Okoth Obado's case is somewhere in the pipelines of justice. On top of our leaders getting way lesser penalties, they get to have their cases take their sweet time during which they beseech people to forgive them, as followers of Embakasi East MP Babu Owino keep on doing. Poor thieves never even get a chance to say a last prayer before mob justice or a rabid police officer takes away their life. INEQUALITY It is unfortunate that in a bid to appear civilised, we have retained a system of justice that not only oversees chaos, but guarantees unfairness, inequality and entrenches injustice. It is true that not all that glitters is gold, and anyway, it is a stretch to imply that those colonial wigs that our learned friends wear glitter. I'm not suggesting that we go back to our ancestor's wisdom, but we cannot afford to have a system in place where our leaders can murder us, break the law and walk away. How many of us shall they kill and how much of our land and taxes shall they steal before we rethink our judicial system and it's unfairness? The author comments on topical issues; mmwercymwende@gmail.com