Nacada has cautioned the public against drinking bouts in homes in the wake of the government’s decision to bar consumption of alcoholic drinks in public places. The National Authority for the Campaign Against Drug Abuse said the restrictions could leave the home as the main alternative for those wishing to indulge in drinking. In a statement through chairperson Mabel Imbuga, the agency said consumption at home exposes children and other young people to underage drinking, which undermines the protective environment for learners who have been forced to stay at home as part of measures to curb Covid-19. “We advise parents to take advantage of the situation to create an alcohol-free home environment as well as build closer relationships with their children,” Prof Imbuga said in the statement. TOUGHER MEASURE A draft legal notice developed by the Ministry of Health plans to bar the consumption of alcoholic drinks in restaurants, eateries, parking lots, entertainment joints, supermarkets or wines and spirits shops to tame the spread of coronavirus. The notice says no one should consume any alcoholic drink in public places which include parks, restaurants, parking lots, eateries, bars, entertainment joints and supermarkets, among others. It also states that the operating hours of any business establishment that deals in the same shall be between 9am and 7.30pm. A person who commits an offence under these rules shall, on conviction, be liable to a fine not exceeding Sh20,000 or to imprisonment for a period not exceeding six months, or both. Pubs, Entertainment and Restaurant Association of Kenya (Perak) has opposed the plan, saying it will cost the economy Sh50 billion in revenue and occasion the loss of about 500,000 job losses in the entire sector. INCREASING RISK Surveys carried out by Nacada, on the prevalence of drug abuse in secondary and primary schools, shows that home environments have increasingly become a risk factor as many respondents indicated they were initiated into alcohol and drug use at home. “While we fully support the measures taken by the government in containing the pandemic, we are strongly opposed to the consumption of alcohol and drugs through organised groups’ drinking bouts in homes in the presence of children,” Prof Imbuga said. She appealed to the public to report cases to the authority through its toll-free line, 1192, or to any national government administration officers. “Parents and caregivers have a primary responsibility to be vigilant and protect children from access and exposure to alcoholic drinks and other substances of abuse. Those dealing with addiction can also call the toll-free line for information on treatment options and how to manage the problem.