The outgoing secretary-general of the Presbyterian Church of East Africa (PCEA) Peter Kariuki Kania has been buried in Kikuyu, Kiambu County. According to PCEA Moderator Julius Mwamba who announced his death, Rev Kania succumbed to Covid-19 at The Nairobi Hospital last week. His remains were interred at the Thogoto PCEA Church of the Torch premises. The burial was attended by several leaders, among them Health Cabinet Secretary Mutahi Kagwe and Deputy President William Ruto. Various church leaders who attended the burial rallied Kenyans to comply the government’s Covid-19 protocols that seek to stem the surging infections. DP William Ruto and other leaders at Rev Kania's funeral. PHOTO | SIMON CIURI | NATION MEDIA GROUP UHURU’S CONDOLENCE MESSAGE CS Kagwe read President Uhuru Kenyatta's message of condolences to the family and church fraternity. He said there is a collective need for all Kenyans to observe the guidelines put in place to contain the pandemic which has affected global economies and human lives. In his message, President Kenyatta regretted that Rev Kanai died when his services were needed most in uniting the country. "He was a selfless church leader and I call upon Kenyans and church leaders to emulate him. I also ask God to give the family fortitude to withstand the loss,’’ he said Also present at the burial ceremony were MPs Oscar Sudi (Kapseret) and Kimani Ichung'wah (Kikuyu). The funeral service was conducted jointly by PCEA Moderator Julius Mwamba and retired cleric Rev Jesee Kamau. OBSERVE COVID-19 PROTOCOLS Rev Kania left behind a widow, two sons and several grandchildren. Speaking at the funeral, DP Ruto urged Kenyans to continue observing Covid-19 protocols to stop the spread of the virus. The DP described the Rev Kania as a warrior of faith and a national intercessor who prayed for the nation. "We are here to celebrate the life of a faith warrior, a gospel soldier and a national intercessor and we ask God to rest his soul in eternal peace," Mr Ruto said.