Kesses MP Swarup Mishra is paying a heavy political price for going against the wishes of supporters of Deputy President William Ruto and endorsing the recent ouster of Garissa Township MP Aden Duale as majority leader in the National Assembly. Dr Mishra has had two of his functions interrupted by rowdy youths for allegedly going against DP Ruto despite his philanthropic acts that saw him get elected as the first legislator in the region from the Asian community. Dr Mishra's political woes were exacerbated after he was dropped from the powerful Health Committee to the lesser Members' Service Committee as vice-chairman. Rowdy youths in two separate incidents two weeks ago prevented Dr Mishra from addressing a function in his constituency demanding to know why he had become a rebel in the DP's own backyard. The MP was forced to leave his function abruptly at Kesses shopping centre where he was set to launch the Last Mile electricity connection project on Monday after angry locals chased him away. Last weekend, youths in Bayete staged demonstrations, asking the lawmaker to respect Dr Ruto. Voters have vowed to teach him a lesson in 2022, while insisting that he had betrayed them. “Our MP has betrayed us. He was among the MPs who signed a petition to remove Aden Duale who has been an ally of the DP,” one of the demonstrators. In a video that went viral on social media, Dr Mishra is engaged in an heated argument with several youths. The lawmaker is seen shouting angrily before leaving in a huff. The demonstrators carried placards written “respect DP Ruto” and chanted slogans against the legislator. They claimed that the MP was out to please President Uhuru Kentatta in order to survive the purge from National Assembly Health Committee, a position they claimed was integral to the success of his private business, the Mediheal Group of Hospitals. They accused him of focusing on his private hospital while neglecting public facilities in the constituency. “Dr Mishra participated in removing Duale so that the President could spare him in the Health Committee to protect his hospitals,” claimed Mr Dominic Kibet, a resident of Annex in Kesses.