Women lobbies in Mt Kenya have accused the government of neglecting the war against narcotics and sex pests, saying 15 underage girls from the region get defiled daily. Mt Kenya South Maendeleo ya Wanawake Chairperson Lucy Nyambura told the Nation that “in all instances where a sex pest strikes, the motivating factor is narcotics’ induced (85 per cent).” The other 15 per cent is from close relatives, family friends, authorities and senior members of the society. Mt Kenya Federation of African Women Educationists (Fawe) Organising Secretary, Cecilia Gitu, said their data for 2019 indicates that girls from poor families and those living with mental disorders are the most vulnerable. She added that girls born out of wedlock are more vulnerable to sexual abuse by rogue foster fathers. THE NUMBERS Girls from families that have alcoholism challenges are also exposed to sex predators. “Girls living with parents/guardians who deal in illicit brews and narcotics are also vulnerable,” she said. She noted that the numbers might be higher, saying the reportage rate is less than 40 per cent since in most cases, parents, authorities and other stakeholders conspire to go for monetary settlements “to sweep the vice under the carpet”. Ms Gitu said Fawe, in partnership with Jubilee Women League and Maendeleo ya Wanawake, are in the process of launching sensitisation drives and raising awareness to fight the menace. She said Fawe is happy that the President has since ordered the National Crime Research Centre to provide the country with credible data on the magnitude of child abuse in the country. “The President’s move is one big gesture that is tellingly of his commitment to tame the dragon of child abuse. Sexual abuse is a horrible form of human degradation, and we will support the President in this fight,” she said. NORMALITY The Kenya Women Parliamentarians Associations (Kewopa) said the frequency, elaborate cruelty and normality of defilement incidents being reported in the region is enough to classify the issue as a ‘Mt Kenya tragedy’. In a recent public show in Murang’a County, Kewopa members Mary wa Maua (Maragua), Machakos Woman Rep Joyce Kamene, her Busia counterpart Florence Mutua and Murang’a’s Sabina Chege said they will soon be launching a sensitisation programme for Mt Kenya communities on the need to respect girls. The lobbies want the government to be proactive in the fight against the menace. “We want security agencies that are proactive… we are tired of mere statements of how security organs will not leave stones unturned in search of justice for sexually abused girls. We want security organs that will guarantee us that our girls’ chastity is jealously guarded,” said Wa Maua.