Kenya Golf Union (KGU) Annual General Meeting which had been set for May 22 but was postponed because of the Covid-19, has now been set to take place on August 21 at Muthaiga Golf Club from 3pm. However in order to abide by the Rules and Regulations set by the Ministry of Health on the Covid-19, the meeting will restrict the number of attendees to 15 while the rest of the delegates to will participate via a Video conferencing. According to the notice of the annual general meeting released on Friday by the current secretary of the union George Gathu, six agenda items have been listed for discussion. They include the election of new office bearers who will serve the union for the next one year. Going by the list of names received by the nomination deadline on March 31, only the post of the secretary and the Executives positions will be contested during the election. Current vice chairman Ben Omuodo of Royal Nairobi Golf Club and a former chairman of Royal did not have a challenger. Thus he will take over the mantle of the union from Karen Country Club’s Anthony Murage who has been the chairman since May 2019. The new vice chairman will be Peter Kiguru of Sigona Golf Club who was also unopposed. Kiguru, who has served for several years as the KGU treasurer, will be replaced by Njani Nderitu of VetLab Sports Club for the position of treasurer. Nderitu has been an executive committee member for the past one year. Taking on the current secretary will be Thika Sports Club’s Ndiga Kithae, a past Thika Sports Club captain and one of the longest serving committee member of KGU. Meanwhile Karuga Macharia of Windsor Golf Hotel and Country Club, Philip Ochola(Muthaiga), Fr. Peter Kimani of Ruiru and Limuru’s David Ndungu will be out to retain their executive committee positions while Martin Nyaga of Kiambu, Collins Were of Karen and Njoro Country Club’s Chris Muchugu will be out to fill the remaining two slots in the committee. Usual participants in the AGM, are representatives of the KGU affiliated clubs, past chairmen and Presidents of the union and all the office bearers and members of the executive committee. All member clubs must send the list of their delegates and their email addresses by August 14, in order for them to be listed in the video conferencing. Besides the election, the day’s agendas will also include the report of the chairman, and the treasurer’s report. The meeting will consider and decide upon the amendment of the Kenya Golf Union Constitution to allow participation of Annual General Meetings and other General Meetings using online platforms, and other matters which the chairman may deem sufficiently urgent.