Kirinyaga Deputy Governor Peter Ndambiri has waded into the political battle pitting his boss Anne Waiguru and ward representatives. Mr Ndambiri Thursday broke his long silence and lashed out at Governor Waiguru over what he said is her failure to initiate and implement development projects in wards represented by MCAs who are not allied to her and who demand to know how taxpayers' funds are spent. He accused the governor of discriminating against the rebel MCAs critical to her and told her to stop. Speaking in Mutungara village in Mwea Constituency – his political stronghold – during the burial of Eunice Wanjiru, the deputy governor told his boss to ensure that development is equitably distributed in the entire region unconditionally. DEVELOPMENT FUNDS "We don't want to hear that some MCAs are given a raw deal because of their political affiliations and for questioning the usage of development funds," he told the mourners. He challenged the governor to take responsibility and explain how her administration utilises funds allocated for various development projects in the region. “The governor should be accountable and the MCAs should not be punished for demanding to know where funds meant for development are invested. MCAs are obliged to oversight the executive because that is their work and the governor should not feel offended," he said. Mr Ndambiri stressed that resources meant to uplift the living standards of the residents should be protected at whatever cost. TRANSPARENCY He told the governor to answer questions on finances asked by the MCAs for purpose of transparency and accountability. “MCAs should get answers for their questions from the governor. I would hate to hear that development is not taking place in some wards. We deserve development equally in the entire county without discrimination," he stated. Mr Ndambiri and Ms Waiguru have been at loggerheads with his boss since the day majority of MCAs fell out with her and started a process to impeach her. The deputy governor was accused of colluding with the MCAs to kick out Ms Waiguru, who has been under siege since last year. However, Mr Ndambiri has since denied the accusations saying he was being framed. The deputy governor and Ms Waiguru have not been seeing eye to eye due to their strained relationship. READY TO SERVE Mr Ndambiri told the residents that despite the rising political temperatures, he is ready to serve them without fear. During the funeral, Bishop Joseph Kibucwa of the Anglican Church urged Governor Waiguru and the MCAs to bury their political differences and focus on development. He noted that residents are suffering due to ongoing political tussle pitting the governor and the MCAs. “Residents are not getting quality services because leaders who are supposed to offer them are engaged in a nasty political battle," he observed. The bishop wondered what the leaders will tell the residents who elected them if they do not deliver on their mandate. PRAY FOR WAIGURU “More often the residents who cast votes are forgotten soon after the polls. This is very bad and the leaders should come to their senses," he said. Nyangati MCA Sammy Maina admitted that the situation is bad in the region and asked church leaders to pray for Governor Waiguru's government. "The governor does not allow dialogue and that is why she is not in good terms with MCAs. She doesn't listen to us and the spiritual leaders should intercede for the government," Mr Maina said.