Police Saturday lobbed teargas canisters to disperse Tangatanga politicians allied to Deputy President William Ruto who had attended a public event at Hamisi MP Charles Gimose’s home. They arrived as early as 7am and sealed off all routes leading to Dr Gimose's Simbi home located off Kisumu-Kakamega highway. They also took down all the tents that had been set up for the gathering. The scenes were dramatic, with Mumias East Ben Washiali and former Kakamega Senator Boni Khalwale sneaking into the MP’s home through a fence after running away from police. Matungu MP Justus Murunga was turned away when he arrived while Dr Gimose was detained in the house. Former Kakamega Senator Boni Khalwale confronts police after they stopped a meeting at Hamisi MP Charles Gimose’s home in Vihiga County on July 18, 2020. PHOTO | ISAAC WALE | NATION MEDIA GROUP CHAOS The drama started after Dr Khalwale started addressing the few MCAs and members of the public who managed to enter the home. Hamisi divisional police commander (OCPD) Johana Chebii then took charge while police started firing teargas forcing the people to scamper. Mr Washiali was covered in a cloud of smoke from a teargas canister while Dr Khalwale fled after pouring water on the OCPD. Outside the home, Dr Khalwale and a host of MCAs proceeded to Gambogi-Jebrok road where their supporters joined them and started hurling stones at police officers. The officers retreated and left the home but the people dispersed fearing they had gone to seek reinforcement. Politicians leave Hamisi MP Charles Gimose’s home in Vihiga County on July 18, 2020 after police lobbed teargas canisters in order to disperse them. PHOTO | ISAAC WALE | NATION MEDIA GROUP OUTCRY Dr Khalwale complained that the government was hell bent on using force to stop Dr Ruto’s allies from holding public meetings. He noted that as their meeting in Vihiga was being stopped, Kakamega Governor Wycliffe Oparanya - an ally of President Uhuru Kenyatta and ODM leader Raila Odinga - was meeting more than 2,000 teachers in Kakamega without interruptions. Dr Khalwale further said Mr Oparanya was Friday allowed to hold a public meeting in Vihiga following other public events by the pro-BBI team. The former senator said they went to Dr Gimose's home for consultations and that they observed rules to curb Covid-19. "There are about 60 of us here yet our meeting is being stopped. Oparanya is currently meeting over 2,000 people in Kakamega and has been given police protection by Uhuru and Raila," he claimed. He said this was a clear indication that the government was bent on frustrating any meetings by politicians allied to the DP. "This will not deter us. The only way they can restore order is to stop their meetings. If they do, we will also comply by stopping ours,” he said. Mr Chebii said he asked Dr Gimose to reschedule the meeting. Smoke from teargas canisters is pictured at Hamisi MP Charles Gimose’s home in Vihiga County on July 18, 2020 after police dispersed a meeting of politicians. PHOTO | ISAAC WALE | NATION MEDIA GROUP PAST INCIDENT A similar incident took place on Friday when police in the county attempted to block a similar forum in Emuhaya that Mr Oparanya., who is Council of Governors chair, attended. Mr Oparanya carried on with the meeting under close monitoring by police, with County Commander Leonard Omolo saying they would no longer allow processions or political gatherings there. He warned that any politician who would disobey the ban would be arrested and charged in court. "Vihiga has a problem; we currently have nine cases of Covid-19. We don't want any political gathering,” he said.