A policeman found guilty of raping a woman in Lamu County was Friday sentenced to life in prison. Lamu Principal Magistrate Allan Temba found Police Constable Rodgers Ouma, 32, guilty of the crime committed in his house at Lamu Police Lines in Langoni on December 8, 2019. Mr Ouma was also found guilty of abusing his position of authority as a police officer. Following the conviction on Wednesday, the court set Friday as the sentence delivery day, especially after filing of the Victim Impact Statement by the complainant. While sentencing the officer,  Mr Temba said the complainant, in her statement given under oath, informed the court that he had issued a new threat, saying he would “eliminate” her if released from prison. She added that shortly after receiving the threats through another police officer, policemen believed to be Mr Ouma’s colleagues started trailing her. NO REMORSE Mr Temba said that taking into account Mr Ouma's lack of remorse, the use of threats and the new intimidation tactics, the court declared him a dangerous sexual convict under Section 39(1)(b) of the Sexual Offences Act. "For the aggravated rape, the court sentences him to life imprisonment to protect the complainant from the promised threat and to act as a deterrent to other like-minded persons. On count two, the court sentences Ouma to 10 years’ imprisonment, which is concurrent with the life imprisonment," he said. The court also ordered the woman paid Sh400,000 as general damages for soft tissue injuries, mental anguish and torture as stipulated under section 175(2) of the Criminal Procedure Code. She will receive the award under the normal civil recovery process. Mr Ouma has 14 days to appeal against the sentence. WHAT HAPPENED The court heard that the woman went to Lamu Police Station at about 8pm that day to report that her husband had been forcing her to take abortion pills as the pregnancy weas unplanned. After recording her complaint, Mr Ouma promised to help her. As she was about to leave the police station, it started raining heavily so he asked her to take cover in his house. When she was in his house, the officer locked the door then grabbed her phone and turned it off. He forced himself on her and threatened to kill her using a knife but she managed to escape and spent the night in a neighbour's house. She could not go back to her house because she left her keys and mobile phone in Mr Ouma's house. The following morning, the woman reported the matter to the Lamu OCS. A medical examination showed she had been raped. Investigators arrested the police officer after finding her belongings in his house.