Tharaka-Nithi on Friday became the 43rd county to report a case of the coronavirus, Governor Muthomi Njuki saying the patient was found at his home after mass testing. In a press statement, Governor Muthomi Njuki said the 65-year-old man was one of the 389 new patients that Health Cabinet Secretary (CS) Mutahi Kagwe announced on Friday. Mr Njuki said the patient had been staying with his family in a village in the county. “We sent 45 samples to Nairobi for screening. One tested positive,” he said, adding the man was taken to an isolation centre amid the tracing of his contacts. While noting that the patient interacted with many people as he moved around, he asked those who interacted with him to volunteer to undergo the test. COUNTY READY Governor Njuki said the county is prepared to handle Covid-19 cases and has 234 isolation beds, out of a target of at least 330. He urged residents to remain vigilant because the virus may spread faster in villages than in towns as most of the people there are not cautious. Mr Njuki also asked residents to continue wearing face masks, keeping social distance and  washing or sanitising their hands frequently to reduce their chances of contracting Covid-19. MANDERA DEATH In Mandera County on Friday, Governor Ali Roba reported the county’s first death - a business based in Mandera town. “Our people are in panic mode so we called this presser to clarify a few issues. Covid-19 is a reality. It is here  and is impacting the lives of our people. This is a call to action  … we must exercise care,” Mr Roba told reporters. He said the county response team on Tuesday received a report of three adults experiencing difficulty breathing. One was at a local private facility and the others at home. “Our rapid response team visited the private facility to check on the patient and took samples for Covid-19 testing. Our medical team advised the facility management to exercise Covid-19 precautionary measures until the results were out,” he said. He said the businessman’s health deteriorated rapidly so he was rushed to Mandera County Referral Hospital,  where he was pronounced dead on arrival. It is suspected that the 64-year-old got infected at the local market where he interacted with other business people. The county team took the second person from his home and placed him in an isolation centre but a test found that he did not have the virus. Governor Roba said the third person had tuberculosis and diabetes conditions and tested positive for the virus so treatments were started. WARNING Mandera has recorded 20 Covid-19 cases - one patient, one death and 18 recoveries. “We are alarmed that our people have relaxed the rules of preventing this disease and abandoned wearing masks and social distancing. This is not healthy. It will result in more infections,” warned Mr Roba. “If [rules are] not observed, we are afraid the situation will get out of control. We warn our people that while public spaces like markets and places of prayer including our mosques are open, they have to observe health protocols.” After recording 18 cases of coronavirus, Mandera flattened the curve and discharged its last patient on June 24. “We managed to flatten the curve during the lockdown but the country has been opened up and cases are surging nationally. It is expected that we will also get travelers with Covid-19. No one is immune. Let us all take care,” he said. On a recent announcement by Council of Governors chair Wycliffe Oparanya (Kakamega), that some counties might be forced to impose a lockdown, Mr Roba said a presidential directive would be followed if issued. TESTING CENTRE The governor noted that Mandera will be able to carry out tests starting next week and therefore know better the extent of local transmission of the virus. Local testing will be enabled with the support of the Kenya Medical Research Institute (Kemri). According to Mr Roba, Mandera stopped testing for Covid-19 mid-June after it became an expensive affair. “We were spending about Sh700,000 on a chartered plane to collect samples. We did it about six times, which was expensive,” he said. “Mandera has borne the highest costs of collecting and transporting samples for testing to Nairobi because we had to charter flights. On three occasions we were supported by the Ministry of Health through Amref,” he said. Regarding the new testing capability, he noted, “It enables timely isolation of those infected and the tracing and quarantining of their contacts. It will help us deploy medical resources and staff more efficiently as we respond to cases.” Mandera has 306 isolation beds, with 10 for intensive care patients  and six for patients in high dependency units.