Football Kenya Federation (FKF) president Nick Mwendwa Friday appeared to woo Kenyan Premier League clubs ahead of the upcoming polls by informing the club chairmen to expect the first batch of grants from the competition's new title sponsor before the end of this month. Mwendwa had on Thursday announced Nigerian gaming firm BetKing as the top-flight league's new sponsor. The record deal, which is yet to be officially unveiled, is reportedly worth Sh1.2 billion over the next five years. Consequently, each of the 18 teams in this competition is entitled to at least Sh8 million and 20 balls per season for the duration of the contract. "The deal was negotiated and concluded in anticipation of the end of the contract between Football Kenya Federation and Kenya Premier League Limited, with a view to ensuring that most of our clubs, most of which have been adversely affected by the Covid-19 pandemic have a significant level of financial cushioning going into and beyond the 2020/2021 season," said Mwendwa in a letter addressed to the club chairmen. The football boss has also invited the club chairmen to a virtual meeting on July 22, aimed so as 'to understand the finer details of the deal.' "Additionally, in the coming days, the FKF Chief Executive Barry Otieno will contact you in regard to your bank account details, to enable the federation to disburse the funds in a timely manner." With Kenyan Premier League clubs accountable for 18 of the 94 votes at the FKF national elections, Mwendwa's move to source a sponsor who could grant them millions of shillings during the electioneering period could prove crucial in his bid to get re-elected. This deal has however received mixed reactions from stakeholders. Former FKF president Sam Nyamweya, who wants his old job back, claims this sponsorship is shrouded in controversy, secrecy and illegalities. "The desperate times by the Kenyan Premier League clubs should not be used as an excuse to perpetuate an illegality. This is because the Sports Disputes Tribunal (SDT) ruled on March 17 that the President of FKF remains in office as a ceremonial president with no powers or capacity to enter into any contractual obligation for and on behalf of FKF," he said. Gor Mahia chairman Ambrose Rachier, Elly Kalekwa (Sofapaka) Cleophas Shimanyula (Kakamega Homeboyz), Daniel Aduda (Tusker), Laban Jobita (Western Stima) and Moses Adagala (Chemelil) are some of the club chairmen who Friday told Nation Sport that they learnt of the BetKing sponsorship through Mwendwa's tweet on Wednesday. "Nobody has talked to me about the sponsorship by BetKing from Nigeria. In fact I read it from Mwendwa's tweet and in the Daily Nation. Why was it so secretive that nobody was involved in the negotiations. I'm not part of it," said Rachier who doubles up as KPL chairman. Rachier said that it would be hard for his club to give up or compliment Betsafe sponsorship with BetKing because the two companies are rivals. "How can I complement or leave sponsorship that is giving me Sh50 million for Sh8 million a year?" posed Rachier in reference to Gor's recent sponsorship from gaming firm Bet High under their flagship brand Betsafe. Kalekwa, whose Sofapaka side is bankrolled by another betting company Betika, also said he knew nothing about the BetKing sponsorship. "I can't speak on what I don't have details about. I was neither informed nor involved in the negotiations," said Kalekwa. But football administrators Caleb Malweyi and Gabriel Mghendi, as well as Posta Rangers chairman John Tonui, who has struggled to pay his players on time this season owing to financial challenges, supported the sponsorship. "The deal will improve the livelihoods of players, coaches, referees, and those directly involved in the game. Players will be motivated going forward."  