DANGEROUS SHOW:  Politicians are setting a bad example as the country fights the Covid-19 pandemic, says Thomas Yebei. He has, he adds, been watching with horror as the politicians congregate in homes and at press conferences, ignoring the guideline on social distancing. The culprits, he adds, include Cotu boss Francis Atwoli, who has hosted many politicians at his Kajiado County home oblivious of the dangers of the pandemic. “He didn’t have a face mask on and was talking loudly and hugging other politicians, who also didn’t have any, either. This is a dangerous show by the leaders. Can’t these politicians realise that we are living in perilous times?” His contact is tomyebei@yahoo.com. *** IMPEACHMENT:  The dust may have settled on the failed attempt to oust Kirinyaga Governor Anne Waiguru after the impeachment by the county assembly was rejected by a committee of the Senate, but Silas Mchiti is not convinced about the verdict. Says he: “When someone declares that the ‘governor was not directly linked’ to the corruption allegations made against her, does it mean she is innocent or guilty?” If, as has been alleged, the Senate will be used to sanitise politicians because they support the Building Bridges Initiative, Mchiti declares, then Thirdway Alliance Party leader Ekuru Aukot’s ‘Punguza Mzigo’ initiative might be better option. His contact wamaarifa@gmail.com. *** BAD ROAD:  Residents of Kenyatta Road in Juja, Kiambu County, though happy that it is being tarmacked, are not amused at how the contractor is going about it, says Beatrice Mwangi. “He has not only done a poor job of tarmacking the road, but leaves mounds of soil right in the middle as he constructs drainage. I thought this should have been done first, but I’m no roads engineer.” As a result, she adds, the traffic in the mornings and evenings is horrendous, as motorists compete with pedestrians, boda boda and tuk tuks for the little space left. Whenever it rains, the section at the ACK church gets flooded. She fears the road will soon be riddled with potholes. Her contact wb.mwangi@gmail.com. *** WALKWAYS: Back in Nairobi after a prolonged stay in western Kenya, Patrick Majanja has been impressed with the construction of beautiful, paved walkways. Says he: “Oh, the joys of a working system. Walking in Nairobi has become blissful. It’s an enjoyable exercise, what with the new walkways built along the streets. No dust, no jostling for space with motorised and non-motorised vehicles and no fear of being hit by a motorist.” From Ngong Road strolling along Hospital Road to Kenyatta National Hospital, Matumbato Road and down to the Industrial Area is now a walker’s paradise. “Kudos to whoever has given us this early Christmas!” His contact is shisanyamajanja@gmail.com.  PORTRAIT: Though currency bearing the portraits of leaders was outlawed in the 2010 Constitution, David Kilonzo is not amused to note that the Sh40 coin that has retired President Mwai Kibaki’s visage is still in circulation. The Central Bank of Kenya, David proposes, should quickly recall the coin and issue a replacement bearing the engravement of a sitatunga instead. Having the portrait of the long-horned sitatunga, which is an endangered species, appearing on the Sh40 coin, he declares, will “constantly remind all Kenyans and the world as a whole of the need to protect this shy antelope” as a vital part of the country’s rich wildlife heritage. His contact is dkilonzi@gmail.com. Have a treasured day, won’t you!