Kirinyaga County on Friday unveiled a seven-member team formed to reconcile Governor Anne Waiguru and ward representatives following a heated impeachment battle.  The team is expected to oversee peace and reconciliation process between the county executive and the assembly whose fight has led to slow implementation of development projects in the region. But a section of the MCAs rejected the team saying they were not consulted when it was being made. Led by Kirinyaga Majority Leader Kamau Murango, the MCAs said they will not participate in the talks. "We learnt about the team on social media and we are treating it as a joke," he said. He urged the governor to humble  herself and consult with the MCAs over matters touching on the county. The team includes Infrastructure Principal Secretary Paul Maringa and his Marine counterpart Nancy Karigithu and Archbishop Antony Muheria. Others in the team are:  J.S Mathenge, Mary Kimonye, John Njiraini and Charles Mwai.  When contacted for comment Archbishop Muheria said he was not aware that he has been named to be part of the peace team. "I'm yet to receive communication about the appointment. I will wait and see if anyone will call and tell me about the team," he told the Nation. Members of the team set to spearhead the reconciliation talks are apolitical and non-partisan, the governor said. They also all come from Kirinyaga. "Following extensive consultations, on the need to refocus Kirinyaga County on service delivery to the people of the region and upon the recommendations that we have peace initiative I have accepted the names of persons who have been proposed to oversee peace and reconciliation process between the county and the assembly," she said In the statement released Friday, Ms Waiguru said the executive remains focussed on service delivery to the residents and accomplishing the set development agenda in the next two years. "We will ensure that the expectations and aspirations of the people remain the focus on our programs and projects so as to move the County higher," she said. Wamumu ward representative Baptista Kanga said the list was good but the MCAs were asked to give their views when it was being formed. "The problem is that the governor did not deem it fit to involve us when selecting the team and therefore we shall not accept it," Mr Kanga said. Ms Waiguru has been embroiled in a protracted battle with MCAs. The MCAs impeached her last month accusing her of gross violation of the Constitution and undermining the authority of the assembly, but she was cleared by the Senate.