 Recently, in a passionate appeal, Benga queen Lillian Auma Aoka, popularly known as Princess Jully – of the Dunia Mbaya hit fame – took to Facebook to offer advice to the young musicians to preach unity. This came after weeks of fighting between Luo Benga artistes on social media. “When my husband Jully was singing, he respected his elders; he never abused any of his peers or elders. What the young Luo musicians are doing is sickening,” she said. “You are spoiling the good name of music which we worked so hard to put on the international stage. Many people depend on our songs to offer solace and comfort, but when we spoil it using such acts, it is disappointing.” The songbird seemed to have been referring to Ohangla artiste Boaz Aketch alias Boaz Jagingo, who has had “beef” with his peers on various social media platforms. Jagingo has received backlash from the industry players. Princess Jully warned artistes against living recklessly after getting money. “Prayers will not heal HIV when you get it,” she said. LACK OF CREATIVITY She also pointed out that lack of creativity is killing Luo music. Known for neatly woven lyrics, with a rhumba touch, Ohangla and Benga music has always stood out to the extent of being used in political rallies. The songs churned out by Benga and Ohangla musicians have known no boundaries. But the past few weeks have seen the respected musicians air their dirty linen in public, engaging in public spats and insults, even as some of their members suffer in silence. It is not clear whether it is the long period of the Covid-19 lockdown that has worsened the situation for the artistes whose mental health, financial constraints and competition has manifested in the new conflict. In the past month, the Ohangla fraternity has lost two respectable artistes, Erick Omondi Odit aka Omondi Long’lilo and Bernard Onyango alias Abenny Jachiga. And renowned Wang’ni Wabiro hit composer Maureen Achieng Otiu aka Lady Maureen has been ailing since last year. Victor Richard Okomo, a friend of Jagingo, appealed to band members, managers, artistes and promoters of Benga, Rhumba and Ohangla music to help him. QUARANTINE Mr Okomo, who is a manager of Freddy Jakadongo, said Jagingo’s troubles started two months ago and there have been attempts by some artistes to help him. “There was a time he was put on quarantine for two weeks. He came out worse and has been running into trouble because of the insults he hurls at people,” said Mr Okomo. Mr Okomo told the Saturday Nation that many musicians, especially in Benga and Ohangla, were used to regular performances – which meant they always have money. The lack of income has affected many of them. Veteran producer Tabu Osusa says the Covid-19 crisis has caught many artistes flat-footed, but adds that it is not just Kenyans but creatives across the globe. Mr Osusa, one of the founders of Ketebul Music, a record label that produced some of the Princess Jully’s songs, says artistes were not prepared for this and that is the source of frustrations of some musicians. “These artistes have lost performances on both local and international tours. What you are seeing is people pouring out their frustrations, but it is not only Luo musicians; it is all over, only that theirs is much more pronounced because of their celebrity status,” said Mr Osusa. He said musicians should think of having savings as well as welfare associations or unions to cushion them during crisis periods.