Two police officers have been arrested in connection to the shooting and killing of two people at a market in Garissa Town on Saturday. Reports indicated that Aden Abdi Madobe and Muhiyadin Adow Shibin were killed by police officers who had been searching for terror suspects. The National Police Service announced the arrests on Sunday, saying it had directed Internal Affairs Unit Director Mohammed Amin to immediately probe the incident at Soko ya Ng'ombe. "The IG has equally directed the DCI to carry out forensic analysis on the firearms used by the officers. The investigations with input from Ipoa and the ODPP shall establish whether or not the officers were justified to use their firearms." DUALE'S CALL The police action followed protests by both residents and their leaders, including Garissa Town MP Aden Duale. Mr Duale asked the Interior ministry to intervene and bring those involved to justice. "I condemn the police brutality that has led to the untimely killing of two innocent Kenyans at Soko ya Ng'ombe by the Kenya National Police," he wrote on social media platform Twitter. "I ask the ministry and the police service to look into this matter urgently and bring to book the trigger-happy cops [sic]." He said the officers are known and that he will not rest until justice is served. SO FAR The two people were killed during demonstrations at the market. "When they found them inside a car, they resisted arrest. That was when residents started shouting and fighting the police, causing chaos that led to demonstrations," said Ali Abdi, a trader. Another trader, Mariam Kheiry, said two suspects ran towards a hotel but police followed them. "We heard gunshots in the direction of the hotel. We found police had shot two people who were seated at the hotel after missing the initial suspects," she said. The Independent Policing Oversight Authority (Ipoa) issued a statement on Saturday, saying it had opened an investigation into the incident. On Saturday night, Northeastern Regional Commissioner Nick Ndalana reported an officer from the Directorate of Criminal Investigations (DCI) had been arrested over the shootings.