Nairobi Senator Johnson Sakaja has done the right thing to resign as chairperson of the Senate’s ad hoc committee on Covid-19 following his own admission that he contravened the curfew law at the weekend. But that is not enough. A leader who flagrantly breaks the law and flaunts his powers around is a disgrace and should face the full consequences of his action. Mr Sakaja is at fault on two grounds. First, he violated the curfew rule that prohibits movement after 9pm. Secondly, he was part of a crowd of revellers who had flouted the social distancing rule. Indeed, as our subsequent investigations revealed, many city residents and elsewhere have returned to their old habits. Bars and other social places are filling up and activities extend well beyond the curfew hours. Worse, security officers abet the transgressions as they are paid to keep quiet. Some of them even own bars and disobey the rules with impunity. But back to the basics. All along, concerns have been expressed that political leaders are the weakest link in the war against the coronavirus. While they speak eloquently in public about safety protocols and the need for compliance, they are notorious for breaking them. Examples abound. Every weekend, groups of politicians troop to the villages and convene all sorts of meetings that attract huge crowds, contrary to the regulations that limit public gatherings to no more than 15 people. Hardly do the people put on face masks or keep safe distance. Yet, daily reports by the Health ministry indicate that infections are increasing fast. At the weekend, we recorded more than 600 infections for two consecutive days. To date, the cumulative number of infections is 13,771. Unless checked, there are fears that they will rise to unmanageable levels. Yet our hospitals do not have capacity to accommodate many coronavirus patients. To be sure, public hospitals do not have space in their ICUs. And although counties were directed to expand their health facilities to accommodate at least 300 patients, little has been achieved. Statistics indicate that less than half of them have achieved that feat. In short, we are staring at a monumental tragedy. Since President Uhuru Kenyatta partially lifted the containment restrictions that included a ban on travel into and out of Nairobi, Mombasa, Kwale, Kilifi and Mandera, travelling has picked up across the country, putting many lives at risk. The need for absolute care cannot be gainsaid. So, when a top political leader flouts the rules, the citizens must demand action. Mr Sakaja and other leaders must obey the law and be a good example to the public. Let him bear his cross.