A man accused of publishing online false information about Interior Cabinet Secretary Fred Matiang'i's health status has been released by a Nairobi court on bail. Isaac Kibet Yego denied the charge before Milimani Senior Principal Magistrate Bernard Ochoi and was given Sh50,000 bail or an alternative of Sh100,000 bond with surety. The magistrate also restrained Yego from making comments on the CS or the case on social media until the case is heard and determined. While urging the court to grant Yego bail, his three lawyers described him as a man of modest means who graduated from Kenyatta University recently and is yet to secure employment. “He is a poor village working as a freelancer from his house. He has a young family which depends on him. He undertakes to comply with all bond terms as he is also not a flight risk,” said defence lawyer Collins Kiprono. Prior to the court’s ruling, he had urged the court to issue a lenient cash bail of Sh10,000 or a bond of Sh30,000 citing the current economic hard times facing many families in the country. The lawyer added that police investigators are stilling withholding Yego’s laptop and mobile phone for forensic analysis. According to the charge sheet, Yego wrote and published false information on Facebook and a website alleging that Mr Matiang’i was sick with the coronavirus and was fighting for his life in an Intensive Care Unit. The CS also chairs the National Emergency Response Committee on Covid-19. Mr Yego is accused of making the claim, which the CS dismissed, between July 23 and 24 at an unknown place within the country. The court paper described the information as an alarming post whose intent was to cause fear and panic to Mr Matiang’i and his family, contrary to Section 23 of the Computer Misuse and Cybercrimes Act No 5 of 2018. Mr Yego has been in the police custody since he was picked up by police from his home in Eldoret on July 25 and escorted to Nairobi for the trial. The State has listed three witnesses including case investigating officer inspector Nicholas ole Sina, Corporal Sudi Juma and a police constable Amin. The case will be mentioned virtually on August 12.