Controversy continues to surround the BetKing sponsorship announced by Football Kenya Federation (FKF) after two clubs declined to sign an undertaking to receive an initial Sh500,000 released on Friday as part of the annual grants. Record Kenyan Premier League (KPL) champions Gor Mahia and Kakamega Homeboyz didn't append their signatures on necessary documents to receive the cash which has already been sent to 15 Kenyan Premier League clubs. Gor Mahia chairman Ambrose Rachier said he has to scrutinise the original sponsorship documents before making a decision. Rachier revealed that he will be heading to the FKF Gola Project offices on Monday to thoroughly and keenly study the BetKing sponsorship contract and seek answers on how it will affect their operations with Betsafe which recently sponsored K'Ogalo to the tune of Sh55 million. This is because the two companies are rivals and there maybe conflict of interest in their operations. "What was brought to us in our meeting was just highlights on the amount, commission and the percentage that should go to the agent Andrea Silva. I have to know the impact of the contract on our relations with Betsafe," he said. "I will be heading to their offices on Monday to thoroughly scrutinise it and if all my questions are not answered then I won't sign," he added. K'Ogalo have made it known that they won't settle for a lower sponsorship package that will affect their current partnership with Betsafe. Kakamega Homeboyz chairman Cleophas Shimanyula also poked holes in the BetKing sponsorship saying he will not be party to it since it lacks credibility. "I won't sign any document for my club to receive initial Sh500,000 because these are just tactics being used by (FKF President Nick) Mwendwa to be re-elected," he said. Meanwhile Tusker chairman Dan Aduda has said the five-member committee formed to oversee KPL's transition to FKF Premier league said they will also scrutinise the details of the sponsorship deal to verify its credibility and not just rubber stamp it. The committee is headed by Ulinzi Stars chairman Eric Oloo. Other members are Dan Shikanda (AFC Leopards), Ken Ochieng (Zoo), Robert Maoga (Kariobangi Sharks) and Tusker's Aduda. 