As Kenya took its first step as the newest oil producer at the Ngamia crude oil storage site in Turkana County on June 3, 2018, Evans Loogos, 18, was among the many locals who turned up to witness the historic moment. Loogos, from nearby Nakukulas village, remembers vividly how four trucks, each carrying 156 barrels of crude oil, were flagged off by President Uhuru Kenyatta when they left for the Kenya Petroleum Refinery in Mombasa for storage and export. Many locals believed the event marked the beginning of a major turn-around in their standards of living. PIONEER CLASS Loogos was then a student in a pioneer class of 98 boys and girls at Ngamia One Kochodin High School, about three kilometres from Ngamia 8. The newly established boarding school had just three classrooms, three toilets, one permanent dormitory for the girls and a congested tent that was wearing out due to strong winds and rains for the boys. Parents and local professionals lobbied for the speedy opening of the school so that they wouldn’t have to take their kids far from home. Principal David Maraka said they had no option but to accept the parents’ wishes. Then after local leaders led by Petroleum Cabinet Secretary John Munyes and Turkana East MP Mohammed Ali Lokiru narrated the sorry state of the school during  a public baraza, President Uhuru Kenyatta directed the Kenya Pipeline Company to allocate funds for improving the school’s infrastructure and also make some transformative social interventions. A tent that was a dormitory for boys at Ngamia One Kochodin High School. PHOTO | SAMMY LUTTA | NATION MEDIA GROUP DORMITORY FOR BOYS KPC Managing Director Macharia Irungu told the Nation  that they built a dormitory for the boys and furnished it with beds, two classrooms and bought 45 desks for each, and built two toilets, all at a cost of  Sh10 million. Principal Maraka said by the time they closed in March, the school, which sits on 50 acres, had 81 Form Three students, 131 in Form Two and 267 in Form One. 'We had to embrace a boarding system to ensure that we retained learners because of their nomadic lifestyle,” he said, adding that enrolment has risen sharply, and they were lobbying for more infrastructure. He said the Constituency Development Fund and locals have also chipped in with funds. MORE CLASSROOMS NEEDED But the school still needs two more classrooms, a laboratory, an administration block and a borehole. It also needs more teachers since it has only nine. Loogos says he is proud to be studying at a school near his home, where he will lay the foundation of his dream of becoming a doctor. He is the only one of six children in the family in school after scoring 221 marks in KCPE at Nakukulas Mixed Primary School in his village. “I’m happy we have a modern dormitory with beds and mattresses. I pray that we win the fight against the coronavirus soon so that we can go back to school,” he said. Mr Lowar Lochi, whose son is in Form Three, said they school does not send children home for school fees but looks for scholarships for them.