Q: A colleague recently told me that I am usually disrespectful when speaking to our boss, but I don’t think so. When I asked her to elaborate on this, but she wasn’t clear about anything. I suspect my colleague is trying to put me down. I have never intentionally said or done anything disrespectful. The boss has not told me anything about this, although we are not as close as she is with my colleague... Constructive feedback can be very useful in nurturing self-awareness, which in turn yields opportunity to make changes necessary for personal growth and development. While feedback is important, it is useful to mind the people and context from which it emanates as well as the purpose for which it is offered. Although it is easy to bask under the warmth of positive feedback, it can be uncomfortable to digest and act on negative feedback, yet the dividends thereof often far outstrip the associated inconvenience. How is your relationship with your colleague? Do you share feedback with her? Has she previously offered you similar feedback? Why do you think she intended to demean you? Are there instances where she has intentionally put you down? Does your boss usually provide negative feedback to her team or is she the type that cowers at the prospect of doing so? Has she offered any feedback to you in the past concerning your conduct? Might your colleague, by sharing the said feedback, have been undertaking an ambassadorial assignment on behalf of your boss? While disrespect is almost instinctively recognisable, often requiring no more than common sense to discern, it can also be given to highly nuanced expression, making it hard to indisputably attribute it to a remark or the behaviour of an individual. How do you address your boss? How do you show up in her presence? How do you respond to her instructions? What do you tell others about her? What do your facial expressions, tone and body language say about your attitude towards her? The manner in which respect is communicated can vary based on many factors, among them context and culture. It is possible, therefore, that a statement, response, tone, facial inflection or gesture can be construed to be disrespectful by some people in some situations and not others. Consider speaking to your colleague some more to fully appreciate the background of the said feedback in order to correctly interpret and act on it. In any event, remember that it takes character to respect people regardless of their rank or your feelings towards them. Fred Gituku Human Resources Practitioner gitukufred@gmail.com