More than 100,000 teachers will receive the last part of their phased pay increase this month. The Teachers Service Commission (TSC) assured the teachers holding administrative positions on the implementation. In a statement, TSC said the pay hike will cost Sh11 billion. “There should be no cause for alarm since it will be paid by the end of July,” said the statement by the commission. It went on: “As we await government directives on reopening of schools, the commission wishes to thank all teachers for the support that they have been according us. We value this partnership which has enabled us to continue serving you even under the current circumstances. Further, we value your efforts in engaging your learners with online lessons and words of encouragement. Thank you and please continue reaching out.” The implementation of the CBA started in July 2017 and will end this financial year, setting the stage for new negotiations. “Another crucial achievement is the automation of TSC services and especially the T-Pay system through which you approve and monitor your third party financial transactions,” added the statement. RECOUNT Last month, TSC ordered a recount of headteachers, their deputies and senior teachers The recount of school administrators followed revelations that some teachers were promoted by mistake after county directors provided wrong information to the commission in 2017. “It has been established that some of you provided inaccurate and misleading data leading to erroneous conversion. Classroom teachers were converted to grades exclusively reserved for institutional administrators, teachers serving as deputy or senior teachers were wrongly captured as head teachers while in other instances, staffing levels in terms of required administrators in a school exceeded the optimum establishment contrary to the established norms,” said a circular by CEO Nancy Macharia. Ms Macharia said the unreliability of the data has negatively affected the commission in terms of payroll management and the process of selection, appointment and deployment of new institutional administrators. TSC is also expected to promote a total of 100,000 teachers in Grade B5 (previously P1) who will automatically be moved to Grade C1 starting this month with Sh7 billion having been set aside for the exercise. Grade B5 teachers currently earning a basic salary of between Sh21, 756 and Sh27, 195 will now take home between Sh27, 195 and Sh33, 994.