President Uhuru Kenyatta on Monday cleared doubts on reopening of learning institutions, saying the government will give a clear roadmap in a few days’ time. The President directed Education Cabinet Secretary George Magoha to call for an education stakeholders meeting to discuss how schools, colleges and universities will be reopened. “I want to clear the doubt and fear that parents have been having concerning our children and when schools, colleges and universities will reopen,” said President Kenyatta. He said the stakeholders meeting will be called within a few days’ time and official dates for schools and higher institutions learning institutions to reopen will be given. Universities and colleges were scheduled to be reopen in September. However, some institutions such as the University of Nairobi have said they will not be able to reopen as scheduled. Vice-Chancellors from both private and public institutions have been doing everything possible to ensure the Covid-19 prevention requirements are met by their institutions in readiness for reopening. ACCESS PREPAREDNESS Prof Magoha and principal secretaries Simon Nabukwesi (University Education), and Dr Julius Jwan (Technical and Vocational Training) have been touring universities and technical institutions to access their preparedness. Earlier, Prof Magoha had said primary and secondary schools will reopen in January. The CS said national exams such as the Kenya certificate of Primary Examination (KCPE) and the Kenya Certificate of Secondary Education (KCSE) for this year had been cancelled and pushed to November next year. He also cancelled this year’s schools calendar and assured parents that the institutions will resume where they left despite the online classes that have been going on. Before reopening, universities, colleges and technical and vocational institutions are required to observe the Ministry of Health guidelines. The checklist include institutions ensuring they have adequate hand-washing points for maximum hygiene preferably foot operated, automatic sanitiser dispensers, gun thermometers, as well as equipped isolation facilities, protective gear and face masks readily available within the institutions to curb the spread of Covid-19. University chiefs are required to ensure clean running water and soap for hand-washing, sanitisers and frequent cleaning and sanitising of frequently touched objects such as doors, knobs, light switches and stair railings. SOCIAL DISTANCING The universities and colleges are also required to ensure adequate space for social distancing and put signs to require staff, students and visitors to keep social distance as well as hand washing and personal hygiene. For primary and secondary schools, the ministry has promised to ensure that learners are provided with two washable masks and schools installed with water tanks for learners to wash their hands. The government allocated Sh6.5 billion and an additional Sh7.4 economic stimulus package for the recruitment of more teachers, improvement of infrastructure and buying of additional desks. Currently, the Senate is in the process of inquiring why the funds allocated to the Ministry of Education is yet to be released to schools to enable them to prepare for reopening. Kenya Secondary Schools Heads Association chair Kahi Indimuli and his primary schools counterpart Nicholas Githemia have since called for school funds to be released to enable them prepare for reopening.