PRIVATE SCHOOL BAILOUT: There is nothing wrong with the government bailing out the private schools, contrary to Knut Secretary-General Wilson Sossion’s opinion, says Mwangi Wanjohi. “The government is for all Kenyans, not just for the poor. Private schools play an important role, which includes complementing, and thus helping to decongest the public schools.” If all the private schools were to be closed, Wanjohi explains, Sossion would realise that some of the children from poor families would be pushed out by those from the rich ones. “Our government is not able to provide schools for all. That is the gap that the private schools so ably fill.” His contact is wanjohimwangi@yahoo.com. *** DISHONOURABLE SENATOR: As a national leader who ought to set a good example, Nairobi Senator Johnson Sakaja should be ashamed of himself for behaving in a dishonourable manner to spend a night in the police cells, remarks Francis Muriuki. “Police had every right to arrest him for violating the Covid-19 rules. But the real low for him was reportedly trying to intimidate the officers with threats of transfers and other untold consequences for daring to arrest him. “If this is the calibre of the leaders we have, then it’s only God who can help us.” His contact is mmuriuki2000@gmail.com. *** SLEEPING ON THE JOB: Nearly a month since Dr Salim Noorani applied to Kenya Power and paid for a new electricity meter for his premises at Bofa, Kilifi County, he is still waiting for the power utility to meet its part of the bargain. And quite disappointing for him, there is no indication that it intends to do so soon. The good doctor received a quotation on June 3 and paid the requisite fee the same day. He was then assigned reference number E22122020050019. “It’s more than a month later and nothing. Seriously, are these people doing their job or just sleeping on it?” He can be reached on Tel 0721245893, or email. drsaleem.noorani@gmail.com. *** ROTTEN APPLE: John Kamau was recently fascinated by the courteous treatment of visitors to the Directorate of Criminal Investigation headquarters on Kiambu Road, Nairobi. He was impressed with the excellent handling of the numerous visitors and the Covid-19 mitigation measures. But it was not all rosy. “When I went to get my fingerprints taken, I got the shock of my life. One officer was not only extremely rude, but also lacking in respect, soiling the friendly image of the department.” For the details, he can be reached on Tel 0721843395 or email emkayconstruction@yahoo.com. *** NOISE RACKET: When the authorities, who should be quickly acting on public complaints, turn a deaf ear to those who feel aggrieved about something, then there is trouble ahead, says Nairobi resident Paul Wachira. “Our complaints about noise from various places, especially in the city, have been ignored, and the noise has now become the order of the day.” The culprits, he adds, include the matatu drivers’ hooting, loud bodaboda motorcycle exhausts and the whistling and touting at matatu stages. “It’s hell, especially for the people living along the major roads in the city. Can the relevant authorities, please, intervene before our eardrums are shattered?” His contact is paul48013@gmail.com. *** PAPA SHIRANDULA: The death of seasoned TV actor Charles Bukeko, popularly Papa Shirandula, from the watchman character he played in the comedy series of the same name, is a huge blow, says Jim Webo. Papa was a hugely talented actor who made a name for himself in stage acting and was a common figure at the Kenya National Theatre, Nairobi. “His biggest achievement on the international scene was the Coca-Cola advertisement that saw him stay in a five-star hotel abroad and rehearse for days to utter the sound ‘Coke brrr!’ We will miss Papa, who was reportedly felled by the shameless invisible thief, Covid-19.” Have a Coke-brrriliant day, won’t you!