Gor Mahia electoral board chairman Henry Kowero has confirmed that businessman and media owner Sam Ocholla is on course to become the new Gor Mahia secretary general after no candidate came out to challenge him for the post. Ocholla is the only nominee who filed his nomination papers for the post by Friday 4pm deadline after his rival Ronald Ngala who is the outgoing assistant secretary general bowed out of the race at the death. "I am not vying and I wish Ocholla the best as he serves this great team for the next four years," said Ngala when contacted by Nation Sport. Ocholla is Lolwe TV and Kisumu-based Dala FM owner. He is a financier of Gor Mahia youth team and together with chairman Ambrose Rachier, are the only two individuals who stand unopposed for the August 8 polls. Kowero confirmed that since the duo stands unopposed they will scrutinise their documents and announce them as chairman and secretary general designate on Monday if they meet all the required threshold. "They have no rivals so that means we will be declaring them officials elect after three days if their credentials satisfy the board that they are eligible to hold the two posts in Gor Mahia," said Kowero. With the chairman and secretary posts having been occupied, Kowero said the club will hold elections virtually for the post of vice chairperson and honorary treasurer only. Former officials Sally Bollo and Francis Wasuna will brace for a big battle for the post of vice chairperson. Wasuna was the immediate holder of the position while Bollo has served as treasurer since 2016. "I have not withdrawn from the race as some people are saying. Treat the reports as rumours," said Bollo when word went round that she had opted out of the race. Honorary treasurer post on the other hand has attracted only two candidates after outgoing organising secretary Judith Anyango 'Nyangi' failed to present her papers because she lacks a degree. Gor Mahia Augmentin founder Dolphina Odhiambo will square it out with academician Dr Chrispine Okoth for the post. Anyango who is popular among the fans has however written to the Registrar of Sports to lament on the use of new constitution which requires all aspirants to have a degree. It is her prayer that she will get positive feedback then move to Sports Dispute Tribunal (SDT) to stop the election. Gor Mahia electoral board chairman Henry Kowero said the name of the candidates will be declared public on Monday and only 560 registered members will participate in the polls.