The government’s decision to push the reopening date for basic education institutions to January 2021 has, undoubtedly, calmed the anxiety of parents who feared that allowing their children back to school sooner could put them at risk of contracting Covid-19. The Cabinet Secretary for Education, Prof George Magoha, also announced that there will be no KCPE and KCSE examinations in 2020 and that the 2020 Standard Eight and Form Four cohorts will sit their exams in 2021. The decisions were guided by three considerations: The safety and well-being of learners, teachers and non-teaching staff in the school system; equitable access to education for all learners; and sustaining the quality of our education system. The safety of learners is a matter of great concern. Opening of schools in September as earlier proposed, even with compliance to the health protocols on Covid-19, would not guarantee the safety of learners as long as the infection rates in the country are going up. SANITISING STATION The government may provide masks to all students, ensure enough washing and sanitising stations in every classroom and enforce the use of temperature guns to test anyone entering the school compound, but there would be a big challenge in achieving physical distancing. Recent gains in basic education saw a spike in school enrolment; it is not uncommon to find more than 50 students in one classroom, making the 1.5-metre gap a logistical challenge. Even more worrying is the risks of inter-county public transport. There is no logical reason to send children back to school with the virus raging. Countries that tried it — like Hong Kong, South Africa and South Korea —closed the schools in some areas when they experienced a new wave in Covid-19 infections. The proposed staggered reopening poses the challenge of equitable access to education. Certain levels of the school would be open and others closed. It would deny some children their right to education and create overlaps that could, for example, lead to having two cohorts of Form One next year. The Kenya Institute of Curriculum Development (KICD) allocates time on task — the time available for teaching and learning a prescribed syllabus or content knowledge in a given subject or discipline. PROGRESSION MODEL Kenya has a linear progression model, where learners complete one class then proceed to the next based on successful completion of all the pre-requisite requirements of a class in one year. Our curriculum is designed, sequenced and paced to show the learning objectives for each year and the duration for attaining these objectives. KICD requires that learners have 35 weeks of contact with teachers per year. Lessons in a week span about 30-40 minutes, allowing teachers to gradually unveil a big learning concept in small manageable chunks. The 2020 calendar was in its 10th week when schools closed in March; students had not covered over 70 per cent of the syllabus. Optimal syllabus coverage means effectively teaching the knowledge, skills, attitudes and values embedded in the syllabus in a series of lessons or periods. Hurrying or skipping risk fatiguing the students or progressing them with deficient content mastery. Therefore, the logical thing was to declare 2020 a ‘lost year’ and start again in 2021. Ms Bonaya is the Chief Administrative Secretary, Ministry of Education. muminabn1@gmail.com. @mumina