Detectives from theEthics and Anti-Corruption Commission (EACC) have arrested five former and current senior officials of Nandi County government over alleged misappropriation of over Sh19 million. Among the suspects are Leah Jelegat and Wilson Yebei who are currently working in the county government’s Agriculture department. The other three are former county officials. According to EACC boss Twalib Mbarak, former chief officer for Finance and Economic Planning Henry Maritim Koech authorised payments worth Sh19,781,551 million to M/s Makiki Agencies limited, a company which belongs to him. "EACC received reports of misappropriation of  Sh19,781,551 at the county government of Nandi  in award of a tender for supply of water dispensers and road construction which was facilitated by the head of procurement and other county officials," said Mr Mbarak in a statement to newsrooms. TENDER COMMITTEE Others who were arrested are Meshack Oreu Tankoi and Henry Kibii Kirui who, together with Ms Jelagat and Mr Yebei were members of the tender committee. The five suspects were taken to Eldoret Central Police Station and will be arraigned Friday. They will charged with abuse of office with Mr Koech facing charges of conflict of interest and fraudulent acquisition of public property. The arrests come at a time when Nandi Governor Stephen Sang is facing an uphill task in fulfilling his campaign pledges due to the bad blood between him, Senator Samson Cherargei and MCAs who have raised the alarm over corruption in the county. Mr Sand is already a marked man by the county assembly over alleged disappearance of Sh177 million World Bank funds meant for infrastructure improvement in Kabsabet municipality. MCAs have questioned why there is little development within the municipality yet the donor funds were received two years ago. The ward reps have accused the county government of doing “almost zero work” in the municipality yet it receives billions of shillings from grants, local revenue and national government disbursements. Governor Sang has also been accused of not allowing the municipality to operate independently after its board members were vetted and approved by the county assembly, leading to the resignation of some of them.