Kisumu Governor Anyang’ Nyong’o on Thursday urged health workers to embrace dialogue in future to resolve industrial disputes. He was referring to the recent strikes staged by doctors and other medics who downed their tools to protest delayed salaries, promotions and other allowances. The 35-day strike was the fifth this year. Healthcare workers resumed work on Thursday following direction from the Labour court. “We expect our health workers to understand the broader financial issues affecting counties and not spend too much time on issues of immediate personal attention,” Prof Nyong’o said. He added: “Currently disbursement of funds to the counties is very minimal given the effects of Covid-19. Serving the wider public is important during this period. There comes a time where all of us must make certain sacrifices.” The governor said there should be more consultative sessions between his government and the health workers fraternity to improve the sector as well as their welfare. “If there are any disagreements, there are usually some avenues for mediation which we should explore to iron out our issues, a role the County Assembly played well,” said Mr Nyong’o. He spoke at the swearing in of the new county executive for Health Dr Boaz Otieno Nyunya, who is taking over a docket that has been riddled with many issues among them persistent health workers’ strikes, the Covid-19 pandemic and the deplorable state of health facilities. Dr Nyunya  has worked as the regional director CDC as well as in different capacities in the Ministry of Health. The governor said the new CEC brings in a wealth of experience at a time when the county is not only rebranding the health sector but implementing a health care system as captured in his election manifesto. “Our people deserve and have a right to quality service delivery and my government will deliver no less. That is the contract I have with the people as their governor,” said Governor Nyong’o. The county boss revealed that his administration has enhanced surveillance both at the border entry points and in the villages following the partial opening up of the country. He, however, pleaded with Kisumu residents to exercise responsible behaviour. “The first line of defence against this pandemic is how we conduct ourselves. It is our responsibility to be more vigilant and observe the MOH containment measures,” said the governor. The new CEC for health also vowed to have a more consultative style of leadership to steer the health sector. "I know my intray is full, but I promise to work with the whole team because i know together we will improve the health sector," said Dr Nyunya. Kisumu Deputy Governor Mathews Owili asked for intervention to reduce teenage pregnancies in the county.