Oliver Goldsmith once wisely put it that he who fights and runs away, lives to fight another day. But he who is battle slain, the Irish novelist and poet wrote, can never rise to fight again. If embraced, such rich words could prove critical to one’s survival in a world teeming with all manner of contests. Unfortunately though, they remain alien to some human beings, who insist on fighting to the last blow even when it is obvious they are soft, immobile targets in the middle of a fierce battle. Look no further than some of Deputy President William Ruto’s allies still spoiling for a fight with their Jubilee Party rivals even when they are down after some rather bloody goring. Soy MP Caleb Kositany has, for instance, deemed it fit to keep firing verbal salvos while clearly at the mercy of his adversaries. The legislator will not stop shouting himself hoarse challenging others to a fight when a tactical retreat appears the better option. Some Ruto allies, among them Nakuru Senator Susan Kihika, have vowed to defeat constitutional changes introduced through the yet-to-be-released Building Bridges Initiative (BBI) report. Regrettably, such miscalculated moves, fueled by bitterness. How would someone, for instance, publicly declare opposition to a report whose contents are not yet known and still expect Kenyans to take him/her seriously? The final version of the BBI report is expected to be handed over to President Uhuru Kenyatta and his Handshake partner Raila Odinga anytime from now. Wouldn’t it be logical for critics to wait for the release of the report before deciding whether to support or shoot it down? In announcing their unfounded opposition to the unknown, Ruto’s allies are exposing themselves as self-seeking leaders who are ready to even stand in the way of what is presumably good for the country, for political expediency. You can only imagine the awkwardness if the BBI provisions turn out to be in their favour after all. Yet, this wouldn’t be the first time this happens. Before the first version of the report was released at Bomas of Kenya last year, Tanga Tanga legislators had been campaigning against it based on hearsay and misinformation. When it was finally released, they beat a hasty retreat and embraced the report after realising it actually favoured them. But their flip-flopping was not lost on Kenyans who now find it hard to take the word of such leaders seriously. Despite their planned opposition to the BBI report, Tanga Tanga leaders know that this will be mission impossible following the changes that saw Kenyatta axe rebels from key House Committees, replacing them with loyalists. The Justice and Legal Affairs Committee is one of five specialized parliamentary teams that underwent major realignments, with legislators supporting the handshake taking over. Other affected committees that will play key roles in handling the BBI include Finance, Delegated Legislation as well as the Budget and Appropriations. Any discerning politician knows that the changes all but secured the route for the passing of constitutional reforms. Rather than waste their time and energy on a losing battle, Kihika and her peers ought to take a backseat, do some soul-searching and focus elsewhere. If anything, why would anyone oppose initiative that seeks to push the country forward? Although the final BBI report is not yet out, Kenyans at least know the nine vital issues it will address. The nine-point agenda - corruption, lack of national ethos, devolution, divisive elections, safety and security, inclusivity, shared prosperity, ethnic antagonism and competition as well as responsibilities and rights - represent the major challenges the country has been grappling with since independence. The BBI gives Kenyans the perfect opportunity to confront these challenges and try to provide solutions through a people-led process that saw the taskforce go to all corners of the country to collect the views from mwananchi. Once its recommendations sail through, it is envisioned that Kenya would never again experience widespread corruption, divisive elections that affect peace and businesses as well as ethnic conflicts as a result of politics. Who wouldn’t choose such a future over the status quo? ROBERT MUNGAI: Mungai is a regular commentator on social, economic and political affairs.