The World Health Organization (WHO) on Wednesday launched its Covid-19 Law Lab to gather and share pandemic-related legal documents from over 190 countries across the world. The initiative is meant to help countries “establish and implement strong legal frameworks to manage the pandemic”. It is by the UN Development Program (UNDP) and Georgetown University in Washington, DC. The lab will act as a database to help nations craft well-designed rules to fight the pandemic and other health crises. It will also contain research on legal frameworks for Covid-19 and analysis on the impact of public health laws. LAWS IMPORTANT At the WHO Covid-19 briefing on Thursday, WHO Director-General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus said the database consists of laws that countries have implemented in response to the pandemic, These include state of emergency declarations, quarantine measures, disease surveillance, mask guidelines, physical distancing, and access to medications and vaccines. Dr Tedros noted that laws are important tools that governments have used in response to the pandemic so they must be well-designed. He said they should not coerce but protect public health while protecting human rights and that the database will continue to grow as more countries and themes are added. “Strong legal frameworks are critical for national Covid-19 responses,” said Dr Tedros. “Laws that impact health often fall outside the health sector. As health is global, legal frameworks should be aligned with international commitments to respond to current and emerging public health risks. A strong foundation of law for health is more important now than ever before.” He added that laws that are poorly designed, implemented or enforced can harm marginalised populations, entrench stigma and discrimination and hinder efforts to end the pandemic. LEGAL FRAMEWORKS The lab will also feature research on different legal frameworks for Covid-19, focusing on the human rights impacts of public health laws. It will help countries identify best practices to guide their immediate responses to the pandemic and socio-economic recovery efforts once it is under control. It builds off the work of the Universal Health Coverage (UHC) Legal Solutions Network, established to help countries achieve universal coverage through the implementation of rights-based legal frameworks. “We need to track and evaluate how laws and policies are being used during the pandemic to understand what works,” said Dr Matthew M. Kavanagh, faculty in Georgetown University’s Department of International Health. Achim Steiner, UNDP Administrator., said, “Laws and policies that are grounded in science, evidence and human rights can enable people to access health services, protect themselves from Covid-19 and live free from stigma, discrimination and violence. The Covid-19 Law Lab is an important tool for sharing good practices on laws and policies.”