 After a public outcry over ruthless evictions of illegal settlers in Eastern Mau Complex in Mariashoni in Molo, Nakuru County, the government has launched an exercise to identify the forest cutlines. But even, as the government moves to identify the forest boundaries, members of Ogiek community, who are targeted, claim the exercise is in contempt of court.   Ogiek Council of Elders Chairperson Joseph Kimaiyo Towett claimed the exercise was illegal. “The exercise is supposed to be conducted by the Lands Commission who will put the beacons and map those who are in the forest land for resettlement,” said Mr Towett. HARASSMENT He added: “What is happening now in Mariashoni is harassment of the Ogiek through an illegal exercise. Molo Deputy County Commissioner cannot use handpicked elders without consulting the Ogiek and take them to the forest to show them fake cut-lines,” said Mr Towett. Senior counsel Gibson Kamau Kuria representing the Ogiek community, on July 14 wrote to Regional Commissioner George Natembeya to stop further evictions. “If the evictions continue, we shall go to court to have those assisting in the illegal process committed to jail for contempt of court,” said Mr Kamau. Kenya Forest Service rangers and police officers combing Eastern Mau Forest in Mariashoni in Molo, Nakuru County on July 16, 2020. PHOTO | FRANCIS MUREITHI | NATION MEDIA GROUP On March 14, 2014 Environment and Lands Court Justice Pauline Nyamweya directed the National Land Commission to within one year of her judgment open a register of members of the Ogiek community in consultation with their cuncil of elders and identify land for their settlement.   On Thursday, Molo Deputy County Commissioner David Wanyonyi, accompanied by KFS officials and heavily armed contingent of police officers toured the water tower and identified the boundaries in the presence of some elders. They were accompanied by two government surveyors who did not have the area map, nor did they put beacons on the purported cut-lines. This raised suspicion among the elders and affected community. When contacted on the issue of mapping out the cutlines, Mr Wanyonyi declined to comment. FOREST LAND “Anything about interview is not possible now. Those are the orders we have as at now. Let us finish the whole exercise because if we engage in too much talk, this work will not be finished…in case of fielding the questions wait for the regional commissioner who will visit this place,” Mr Wanyonyi told Nation. However, a source in the enforcement team told the Nation that on Wednesday, they held a meeting with Mr Natembeya, KFS officials and picked 10 elders from the area to validate the exercise. “The evictees have no problem moving out of the forest land, what they want is to be shown where the cutline is and that is what we are doing,” said the source. There was tension in Mariashoni trading centre as it emerged that structures in the area had been earmarked for demolition. A team of Kenya Forest Service rangers, administrators and Kenya Police Service officers at Eastern Mau forest in Mariashoni in Molo, Nakuru County on July 16, 2020. PHOTO | FRANCIS MUREITHI |NATION MEDIA GROUP  At least 5,300 members of the Ogiek are targeted for eviction as the government moves to restore the water tower. So far, only less than 1,000 members of the community have been resettled by the government. At least more than 300 houses have been torched by the KFS officers after the owners removed their belongings. Kenya Forest Service is undertaking a multi-agency operation to reclaim Logoman, Sururu, Likia, Kiptunga, Mariashoni, Nessuit, Baraget and Oleposmoru forests within Mau Forest Complex. The operation started on June 27, 2020.  The mission of the operation is to stop all illegal human activities from government forests which form the Eastern side of Mau Forest Complex. At least 4500 hectares of forest land has been reclaimed, 945 illegal structures destroyed.