Kenyan Premier league side Bandari FC have dropped eight players as the team seeks to work with a lean squad in the upcoming season. Nation Sport has established that assistant coach Ibrahim Shikanda also had his contract terminated at the end of June contrary to the club's assertion that he was still part of the team. Despite club technical officials keeping the on-goings at the club a top secret, Nation Sport can reveal that striker Wycliffe Ochomo, goalkeeper Mustapha Oduor,  utility Moses Mudavadi  and midfielder Cliff Kasuti received dismissal letters on Monday. Also receiving their termination letters are four other players whose identities we could not immediately establish as club organising secretary Dickson Kibagendi and Chief Executive Officer Edward Oduor did not answer our calls.  Bandari vice chairman Bernard Osero Friday confirmed that the club will not be renewing contracts of players who will be deemed surplus to requirements. "It is true we have released some players at this time when the transfer window is still on so that they can be able to be absorbed somewhere instead of waiting for August when their contracts will expire and the transfer window will have been closed," Osero said adding that those players will continue receiving their salaries until their contracts expire. He however said he could not exactly establish the particular players who have been released after his phone calls to Oduor and Kubagendi went unanswered. Bandari assistant coach Ibrahim Shikanda Friday also confirmed that his contract was terminated in June and wished the team well in their future assignments. "I want to confirm that my contract is still running up to June 2021 but a received a phone call from the club CEO Edward Oduor informing me that they will no longer need my services from June," Shikanda said on telephone from Mumias. He however said that he expects Bandari to respect the contract and pay him his dues. "The contract is very clear that when the club terminates your contract, they are supposed to pay you two months salary in lieu of notice and that is what I will be finalising with them next week," he added. The former international full back however said he was shocked by his dismissal. Last month, Kibagendi denied reports that they had sacked Shikanda after social media was awash with reports that his contract had been terminated.