A church official in Kakamega has been arrested for touching the private parts of five girls aged between five and seven years. The suspect is reported to have repeatedly used sweets to lure the children to the church in Amalemba estate before assaulting them. Kakamega Central police commander David Kabena said the suspect has been molesting the girls inside the church. He said the suspect will be charged with sexually assaulting the girls and touching their private parts. “We are questioning the suspect and have taken the children to hospital for medical examination. He will appear in court after we have completed the investigation,” said Mr Kabena. ANOTHER ARREST In Kakamega North sub-county, a 20-year-old man was arrested on Friday after two schoolgirls were found in his house. One of the girls is 13-years-old and the other 16. The assistant chief of Kakunga sub-location,  Mr Jackston Ambulwa, said the suspect was arrested by members of the public and handed over to officers at Malava Police Station. “The girls have been sneaking from their parents’ homes to spend the night at the suspect’s house. We have handed him over to police for further investigations,” said Mr Ambulwa. MAN KILLED Elsewhere, a youth leader at a church in Lumakanda, Likuyani was killed after he was allegedly caught red-handed in bed with a fellow church member's wife. The man's wife said he left their house in Kona Mbaya village at around 9pm on Wednesday evening but did not say where he was going. “He returned at around 11.45pm with serious injuries on his body and his clothes were soaked in blood. He had deep cuts in the head, hands and legs and claimed he had been attacked by unknown people,” the woman said. She said she administered first aid but that his condition worsened and he fainted. “I rushed out and called neighbors who assisted me to take him to Lumakanda Hospital where he died while undergoing treatment,” she said.  It was later established that the youth leader was attacked by the man who allegedly found him in bed with his wife. The perpetrator went into hiding and police are looking for him.