Tharaka-Nithi County Assembly Tuesday elected Chiakariga ward rep Njagi Mucee as the new deputy speaker replacing Ms Susan Ngugi. Mr Mucee was elected unopposed after the other contender, Mr Kinyua Mbogori of Mariani withdrew hours to the sitting. Ms Ngugi was ousted on Feb 12, 2019 on accusations of storming out of the chambers on December 12, 2018 as the list of assembly business committee nominees was being tabled. She was also accused of using un-parliamentary language contrary to her duty of safeguarding the dignity of the assembly and making sure that its rights and privileges are defended. Ms Ngugi was also blamed for leaking house business committee discussions to the public and the press with an intention of sabotaging and embarrassing the members. The ouster motion was sponsored by the then-Majority Leader and Karingani ward representative Godfrey Murithi, who was last month replaced by Mr Peterson Mwirigi of Ganga ward. The motion was supported by 16 out of 19 members in the assembly. At the plenary on Feb 12, 2019, Mukothima MCA Mwenda Gataya and nominated Ward Rep Anita Karimi accused Ms Ngugi of failing to defend the interests of the county government while Mugwe Ward Rep Denis Mutwi, claimed that Ms Ngugi had falsely accused them of receiving Sh150, 000 each from Governor Muthomi Njuki to support her ouster. Ms Ngugi, however, denied all the accusations and claimed that she was being targeted because of condemning ‘rampant corruption’ in the county. Defending Ms Ngugi, Mwimbi MCA Jonnes Kinegeni said the accusations leveled against Ms Ngugi did not warrant impeachment, while nominated MCA Millicent Mugana claimed that the deputy speaker was targeted for criticising the executive. In the court, Ms Ngugi claimed that she was being discriminated because she was the only county assembly female deputy speaker in the country and that all the accusations leveled against her were false. She denied walking out of plenary as a sign of protest to the names of the house business committee that were being read arguing that she had gone to answer a call of nature. Issuing the ruling on June 30, 2020, Chuka High Court Judge, Justice Robert Limo justified the ouster noting that MCAs have the powers to elect or remove deputy speaker because it was within their mandate according to the standing orders. He said the court could not overturn the decision of the MCAs unless during the process they went against the constitution. Justice Limo noted that unlike the County Assembly Speaker’s office, that of the Deputy Speaker was not a constitutional office and that it’s only supported by the house standing orders. “The MCAs have their own house powers supported by their house standing orders to elect or remove the deputy speaker anytime they want and the court has no mandate to challenge their decisions,” said Justice Limo. The ruling left the embattled Ngugi at the mercy of her colleagues who had unfortunately determined to remove her. Making his maiden speech at the plenary shortly after taking the oath of office, Mr Mucee promised to unite the Assembly in order to have an ample working environment and also to remain a neutral umpire. “My resolve as the new deputy speaker is to unite the whole Assembly in order for us to deliver to the people,” said Mr Mucee. Majority Leader and the Minority Leader Mr Wilson Nyaga of Muthambi ward lauded Mr Mucee for the new position and exuded confidence that he will play the critical role of deputizing the Speaker among other roles keenly. Sought for comment, Ms Ngugi said was not ready for a comment.