The Court of Appeal has dismissed a petition challenging the appointment of Prof Olive Mugenda, Felix Koskei and Patrick Gichohi to the Judicial Service Commission (JSC). A three-judge bench has ruled that the appeal filed by a human rights advocacy group, Katiba Institute, lacked merit because the process of appointment complied with the Constitution and the guiding statutes. The lobby group was challenging the National Assembly’s decision to clear the three on grounds that their nomination undermined public perception on the independence of the Judiciary. Prof Mugenda and Mr Koskei were nominated by President Uhuru Kenyatta while Mr Gichohi was nominated by the Public Service Commission (PSC). They were approved by the National Assembly on February 28, 2018 and subsequently appointed as commissioners to the JSC. The appellate judges said the decision of the National Assembly may not have been acceptable to the lobby group and others, but the Court cannot be called upon to replace that decision with one preferable to the appellant or even to the court. The judges also dismissed the petitioner’s complaint that the nomination and appointment process lacked competitiveness and merit as envisaged by Section 46 of the Public Service Commission Act, 2017.  The group added that the appointment contravened articles 10, 232 and 234 (2) (c) which champion the values and principles of public service. It further argued that section 15 (2) of the Judicial Service Act, 2011 is unconstitutional for failing to provide for diversity, merit and fair competition in considering appointments to JSC. However, the bench comprising justices Wanjiru Karanja, Asike Makhandia and Fatuma Sichale held that a statute cannot be enacted to fetter or qualify what the Constitution has not allowed. “The Judicial Service Act cannot restrict the power of nomination and appointment given to the President under Article 172(2). The general principle of interpretation of statutes is that a law or regulation should as much as possible be read to be consistent with the Constitution,” stated the judges. According to the judges, the issue of competitiveness is not an imperative under Article 171 (2) H of the Constitution on the membership of the JSC. Article 171 (2) H says in constituting the JSC two people (one man and one woman) should represent the public. They should nominated by the president and approved by Parliament. “The only merit required for nomination under this Article is the sex of the candidate, and the qualification of not being lawyers. The appointing authority is only restricted to those constitutional requirements,” said the judges. They added: “The Constitution is replete with qualification requirements for other commissioners and constitutional office holders. If Kenyans desired to attach other merit qualifications for appointees under Article 171 (2) H, they would have expressly so stated in the Constitution.” The court ruled that it cannot be said that a statutory provision is inconsistent with the constitution for replicating what the Constitution provides. On claims that Mr Gichohi’s nomination by PSC was illegal for lack of public participation, the court held that members of the Commission decided to nominate him having found him qualified for such nomination. They said his nomination did not call for public participation. “The commissioners were best placed to make the said decision and not the courts or members of public,” said the bench. Since his nomination was made three days before expiry of the term of his predecessor, the court said the move was not prejudicial to anybody because by the time he was appointed the office was already vacant.