It may not seem like it, but there will come a time when you and your employer have to part ways. Your departure may be occasioned by a redundancy notice issued to you, or because you’ve gotten a new job somewhere else. Regardless of the circumstances, that process can be quite emotional since it requires one to sever ties with acquaintances they may have known for years, and leave the familiar office space behind. While there are no hard and fast rules on how best to exit the workplace, human resource expert May Nyaga offers some top tips that could make that transition incident-free for both parties. Communicating the news The notice of redundancy must be delivered with utmost discretion and compassion by line managers and the HR team. How the information is passed to the employee is critical. I prefer to call the employee to a meeting in a private room that is situated away from any prying eyes. Hold a candid discussion with the affected employee and deliver the news of termination in a language they understand. Let the employee determine how long that meeting lasts. Do not be in a rush. When to pick the letter There are no strict timelines within which to fetch your termination letter. By the time the letter is issued, the company should have complied with the Employee Act 226 Section 40 on termination on account of redundancy. If no timeframe has been set by your HR team, you may pick the letter immediately or later in the week. When to pack up During the discussions with your line manager and the HR representative, you will agree on your last day of work based on your role. Once this is determined, you can start packing. However, it is OK to pack your belongings on your final day of work.  Returning equipment Surrendering company property such as laptops, uniform and badges is part of the handover process. Most companies have well-defined clearance processes for employees to follow. Ensure you return all company property in working condition, and start by giving back items you no longer need so that you don’t have too much to do on your final day at work. Collecting your dues After you are done with the clearing process, HR will calculate your final dues with help from a member of the finance department. You will then be advised on when to collect the cheque. This money could also be deposited in your bank account. A certificate of service and a recommendation letter may also be issued upon request.  Claiming for refunds (if any) Before the payment is done, you will be called in to confirm that the calculations are accurate, and to seek clarity on any issues you may have. This is the time to seek refunds for any personal finances spent on behalf of the employer to avoid any disputes in future. The actual clearance This entails clearing with line managers and all other departments including IT, finance, administration and HR. In the wake of Covid-19 and the need to minimise contact, this process can be done digitally. Saying goodbye People react differently to news of a redundancy. Some people feel betrayed and may, therefore, act with indifference towards others. Others choose to confide in their closest colleagues, then clear and exit immediately. Going back to the office This depends on the employee, and the reason for which they wish to visit the office. It could be to visit former colleagues or to share a business proposal. Still, others may choose never to go back. Outplacement programmes This is a great way for employers to help their employees’ transition to the new, uncertain future and to maintain healthy relationships. Bear in mind that those leaving the company contributed to its success. When they exit, they remain your ambassadors. Examples of outplacement services include counselling, reviewing the CVs of departing employees, sharpening their interview skills and linking them with other recruiters. Insurance It is also important to renegotiate medical covers and other benefits with insurers on behalf of the employee as they transition to life without work. Marching ahead It is also especially necessary to let the remaining employees know when the process of laying off workers comes to an end, and to roll out a fresh strategy for the company’s future. This helps to rebuild trust and to spur productivity and engagement.