FREE CIGARETTES: A tiny item that has been ignored in the campaign against Covid-19, but which could make a big difference, is cigarettes, says Joe Ngige Mungai. “In the rural areas, people are overly social and share almost everything, including cigarettes. If a person infected with Covid-19 shares a cigarette, there is a high likelihood of infecting the other person.” Joe wishes smoking could be banned but knows it is not that easy, considering smokers’ addiction to tobacco. The county and national governments, he pleads, should consider including free cigarettes in the relief packages being distributed to the needy to help them cope with the health crisis. His contact is mungai6969@gmail.com. *** LAND GRAB: Even as Environment Cabinet Secretary Keriako Tobiko appears to soften his stance on the grabbed Ngong Forest land, on which private individuals built residential estates, Ken Butiko is calling on fellow Kenyans to remain alert to stop the endemic menace. Shocking, Ken adds, are the emerging stories on how the forest land was grabbed by powerful people and subdivided amongst their cronies. “Kenyans must thank God that former President Mwai Kibaki came to power in 2002, as the land grabbers had targeted Nairobi National Park.” His contact is kennedy.butiko@yahoo.com. *** SEARCH FOR SOLUTION: As schools remain closed over the Covid-19 pandemic, Martin Wandahwa says the country missed an opportunity to reopen them affordably. Major (Rtd) Wandahwa adds: “We could have adopted the suicide-bomber phenomenon and launched our children back to school and crossed our fingers. An idea was floated that learners be fitted with personal protective equipment (PPE) for classes to resume.” He proposes: “CS George Magoha should invite universities with an offer of a reward for a solution. Education is running out of time.” His contact is martahwa@yahoo.com. *** HEROIC KAGWE: For his sterling job in the fight against Covid-19, Okwaro Inyende says Health CS Mutahi Kagwe is his hero. In his bad books, though, are the people who ignore the safety guidelines. Mr Kagwe’s efforts, Inyende adds, are being frustrated by these people who even mimic his warnings, turning them into a joke nobody needs. Kenyans should heed the appeal to protect themselves and others. “Politicians, the weakest link in the fight, organise gatherings knowing you are foolish enough to attend, but will not be with you when you fall sick.” His contact is pokwaro@gmail.com. *** LOST BUNDLES: A loyal Airtel customer of many years, Firoz Ayub feels shortchanged and wants a refund. He subscribed to the Unliminet offer but, due to a “system error”, lost bundles. From 16,546 minutes and 141,066 SMSes on June 11, he got only 500 minutes and 3,970 SMSes on July 17. The Nakuru office told him the matter had been escalated to the headquarters in Nairobi. He recalls having had a similar problem in December 2016 that was resolved after Watchie highlighted it. “When there is a bill, they suspend the service very fast.” His phone number is 0733 906 785 and his email firozayub@hotmail.com. *** ‘HONEY SUCKERS’: Muriithi Kiragu, of Nyeri County, is “deeply concerned” about the health threat locals face from the operation to rid their neighbourhoods of human waste. “Most vacuum trucks operate in broad daylight. The ‘honey suckers’ extract septage or faecal sludge from pit or septic latrines in Othaya Town, posing a health hazard. The trucks emit harmful gases that can cause respiratory system problems for residents exposed to the pollution. I think this work should be done at night. Can this matter be urgently addressed by the county authorities?” His contact is jonsheph8@gmail.com. Have a healthy day, won’t you!