Property developer Acorn has set up facilities for virtual learning and contactless transactions targeting universities reopening to make up for three months lockdown and growing pressure on cashflow. Acorn, whose accommodation facilities have been shut since March reopened Qwetu hostel residences two weeks ago saying they have put in place authorised public health protocols in all residence and, therefore, recommended for occupancy. The company says they have since seen a number of residents checking back into the property which is more conducive for studies than home. “Our waiting list for September exceeds our capacity; we have also seen a huge interest in Qwetu from university administrators as they seek credible accommodation partners to enable them to resume classroom and virtual learning in September 2020,” said Patricia Wambua Acorn communications executive. HOUSING SHORTAGE The firm says they anticipate a severe shortage of student housing when universities resume as most hostels, both on and off campus, have previously been extremely overcrowded and will now have to operate at lower capacities due to social distancing requirements and other public health protocols. “Though the pandemic may seem as a huge threat to businesses including student accommodation, it will also be a huge opportunity for those who will quickly comply with Covid-19 protocols because there will be a flight to safe and secure accommodation,” she said. Acorn became the first company in the country to take up a green bond for building student accommodation, which has been listed on Nairobi and London stock exchanges. The firm raised Sh4.3 billion which would go into its low cost student hostels, Qejani that will charge as little as £50 (Sh6,787) a month. The bond that has strict repayments terms sought to safeguard investors and months of coronavirus shutdown threatened to squeeze cash flow for the company. Acorn, however, says the green bond is performing well. All coupons have been paid in a timely manner and the tranched drawdowns continue to allow construction to carry on. RENTAL INCOME “All our construction sites have remained open and working with no disruption. All site workers have been adequately protected through various measures agreed with public health authorities,” Ms Wambua said. Acorn Group Holdings made a Sh1.2 billion net loss in the year ended December 2018, according to the latest available disclosures by the company. The firm says it is still in its growth phase and will make profits once it scales up its development projects that will generate rental income and capital gains. Acorn’s sales rose 241.6 percent to Sh186.2 million in the review period. The company recorded a paper loss of Sh115.7 million in its investment properties, reversing a gain of Sh488.8 million a year earlier.