The right mix of friends has the potential to introduce you to your destiny.  Grace Were, a musician based in Nairobi know this only two well.  In 2015, a few friends who were in a band encouraged her to join them.  It turned out to be the first step of her inspirational journey as a singer, songwriter, deejay and most recently, founder of a women empowerment show called Touch of a Goddess.  Grace, better known by her stage name—Acey Gracey speaks to Life and Style: Did you  plan to have a career in music?  I wouldn’t say I planned for it. Music found me. I have a degree in Business Management from Moi University.  In 2015, I was invited to sing in my friends’ band called Usoni. It was such an awesome experience and I knew right then I had met my true calling. In 2016, I had an opportunity to record a duet, “Sitaki Mwingine”,  with the talented Pascal Tokodi.  This was like the green light for me to venture out as a solo artiste.      You are also a deejay…  Oh yes! I discovered my deejaying skills  through my friends. I do have amazing people in my circles as you can clearly tell by now. (Laughs).  My friends have a unit called Hive Djs. I would join in as a hobby and they nurtured me, taught me everything I know about navigating the deck.  Today, I am able to make money off deejaying and to create my own expressions of music mixes. It is mind blowing! Grace Were ( in black top) is a musician based in Nairobi. She's pictured here with her band. PHOTO| COURTESY Through your music, you have established a platform to give back to society. Tell us more about your women empowerment show. Touch of a Goddess is an event specifically tailored to give more women an opportunity to display their gifts. The show features various criteria of artistic talents including music, poetry, modelling and visual art.  The show incorporates a mentorship aspect where we invite experts in various field to come and talk about issues that affect the lives of women today.  The show is interactive in the sense that it allows women to be seen and heard and on the other hand, listen and learn how to handle challenges that come along their way. Wonderful. What prompted you to embark on this noble cause? As a young woman seeking to establish a career in the entertainment field, I faced a lot of challenges.  Unfortunately, my experiences are not unique. So many women are forced to make a choice either to compromise their principles, or stick by them and walk away empty handed. I wanted to change this narrative. Each time we host a show, it warms my heart to see women being appreciated on stage purely on merit and no other shenanigans. It is so fulfilling to make the path easier for those who are just starting out. How many installations have you had so far of the show? We have had four editions so far, the last one was held at the Micheal Joseph Centre at Safaricom House. We are also hoping to have these shows in other counties, not just Nairobi. At the moment, all plans are on pause in compliance with the fight against Covid -19. Grace Were is a musician based in Nairobi. PHOTO| COURTESY What has been the reception like so far? Impressive to say the least. We have connected with the target, more women are willing to put their voices out there against all odds. I am excited to see the event grow in days to come.  Before Rona, I was able to interact at a personal level with some of the artistes we feature and it was encouraging to see their passion and enthusiasm in showing the world what they have to offer.  We are truly changing the narrative. When you look into the future what do you see? During this pandemic season, I am spending a lot of time recording music. My fans, stay tuned, I have a lot of good music lined up for you.    I am also in the process of establishing a company called Acey and Friends which will steer all our projects. Let’s be good friends and help one another achieve our dreams. My friends used to tell me I have a great voice, and today I am the voice behind Pace Headphones. I had the guts to take up that opportunity because of  friends who believed in me.  As we fight coronavirus, take care of your friends by following all the health precautions as directed by the Ministry of Health. Stay safe!  