Kenya on Thursday recorded 796 new cases of Covid, the highest number of infections in 24 hours, as the national caseload reached 15,601. The new cases were found in 6,745 samples tested the previous day. Health Chief Administrative Secretary Mercy Mwangangi said another 378 patients had recovered, bringing the total number of recoveries to 7,135. Despite the soaring numbers, Dr Mwangangi said the government is in control of the situation. “Our alert system shows we are in control. Countries that have been like Italy, which are overwhelmed, cannot be compared to Kenya. We have an alert system that shows us where we need to focus should the situation escalate,” she said. Ms Mwangangi  said more than 500 health workers have been infected with the virus, with the latest being at  the National Spinal Injury Hospital. Meanwhile, three more people died bringing the total number of deaths to 263. With a 1.7 per cent fatality rate in the country, Dr Mwangangi urged Kenyans to seeking medical attention whenever they feel unwell. “In the past few days we've received several reports of patients who are afraid to seek medical care, and we are witnessing cases where people are rushing to hospital at the last minute,” she said. She added that such patients have succumbed to the virus since medics were not able to intervene at the appropriate time. Dr Mwangangi said that 89 percent of the recorded cases in Kenya are asymptomatic. The oldest of the new cases is aged 87, while the youngest is one. Nairobi has recorded the highest number, with 539 cases. The surge in cases comes just days ahead of the Fifth Extraordinary Session of the National and County Governments Co-ordinating Summit, during which the President is expected to discuss whether the country is prepared for the coronavirus peak, and whether more containment measures will be put in place. The President is expected to discuss his options of either imposing a lockdowny or instituting further containment measures that will see the restriction of movement in counties that have witnessed a spike in cases in the past two weeks. Currently, the only three counties that have not reported a single case are Baringo, Samburu, and West Pokot. The government has tested only 398 people of the combined 1.5 million population in the three counties. The meeting will assess the counties preparedness, review the efficacy of the containment measures, and consider the evolution of the disease and the medical models on how the coronavirus might spread between August and September.