Three ward representatives, who opposed the impeachment of Governor Anne Waiguru, have been suspended from the Kirinyaga County Assembly. An assembly committee accused them of gross misconduct. Karumandi Ward Rep Antony Munene, and his Kabare counterpart, Mr Patrick Chomba, have been suspended for five and four months respectively. Nominated Ward Rep  Lucy Njeri got a six-month suspension. She was ordered to apologise to Speaker Anthony Gathumbi for publicly doubting his integrity. The three are barred from sitting or taking part in House committee business while their suspensions last. The decision to suspend them was made on Tuesday during a special sitting. The sitting followed the recommendations of the Powers and Privileges Committee that found the ward reps guilty of gross misconduct. CHAOS AND HURLING INSULTS The assembly accused the three members of shouting, causing chaos and hurling insults at colleagues while opposing the motion to impeach Governor Waiguru early last month. According to the report of the committee tabled in the House, Mr Munene, Mr Kabare and Ms Njeri’s conduct was in breach of the privilege terms of assembly. The committee added that disciplining the three ward representatives would protect the dignity of the House. “When members misbehave, they diminish the dignity of the House and hinder its performance. Conduct that is in breach of the privilege should be met with adequate sanctions,” the team said in the report that was endorsed by a majority of the ward representatives. Deputy Speaker Joel Wagura said the decision of the assembly cannot be challenged. The three leaders denied committing any offence, adding that they are being victimised for supporting the governor. They dismissed the decision of the assembly as punitive, and threatened to move to court. Mr Munene, Mr Kabare and Ms Njeri said no punishment and intimidation “will deter us from resisting attempts to kick Governor Waiguru from office”. EXCHANGED BLOWS AND KICKS “Our governor is innocent and we will continue protecting her when she is wrongly accused,” Mr Munene told journalists. Chaos erupted at the assembly on June 9 when ward representatives fought during the motion to dismiss the county boss.The leaders exchanged blows and kicks, temporarily disrupting the motion. Assembly orderlies restored order. Trouble started when Mutira Ward Representative Kinyua Wangui rose to move the motion. As he was speaking, Mr Munene and Ms Njeri shot up, saying their names wrongly appeared on the list of those backing the impeachment. They confronted Mr Wangui, saying, the motion should stop. Noisy scenes followed as the two shouted at Mr Wangui. It was then that ward representatives supporting the motion attempted to throw the two from the House. Blows were exchanged and chairs thrown inside the county assembly. Orderlies separated the two groups. Mr Munene and Ms Njeri were thrown out of the House, accused of fomenting the chaos. Ms Waiguru was later impeached.