Director of Public Prosecution (DPP) Noordin Haji has approved a murder charge against Busia County businessman Denis Ndubi Mauda, who is accused of luring his two neighbours to a death trap. It is said that Ben Maxwell Anyira and Joshua Gichuki Mwangi went missing on February 3 after Mr Mauda asked them for help in taking his sick wife to hospital. The businessman was arrested at his Busia home on July 5 and will undergo a mental assessment before answering to the charge. BODY FOUND Senior Principal Magistrate Bernard Ochoi was informed on Friday that Mr Anyira’s body was found in Ngubi Forest along Kamandura-Mai Mahiu Road on February 20 after a 17-day search. Members of the public  found the body after following a foul smell and notified officers at Ngubi patrol base. Officers from Kijabe Police Station collected the body and took it to City Mortuary. Mr Anyira’s wife, Phanice Asiko Muhando, and his other relatives identified the body at the morgue. A post mortem stated that the deep cuts found in the body were inflicted by a sharp object. Mr Gichuki’s body is yet to be found. Ms Asiko and Mr Gichuki’s wife, Christine Njoki, reported their disappearance to police after they failed to return home on the night of February 5. Ms Njoki said Mr Mauda, Mr Anyira and Mr Gichuki left their house in her husband’s Toyota Succeed, registration KCS 481F “to take Mauda’s wife to hospital”. The vehicle was found at the car wash at Roselyn Rivera along Limuru Road amid the search for the two men whose phones were switched off. BAIL REQUEST In court on Friday, Corporal Lucas Juma said, “It is only Mauda who can state where Gichuki’s body is and identify the persons with whom they held meetings at Ngara and Riruta in Nairobi and Mucatha and Banana in Kiambu.” Corporal Juma asked the court to remand the suspect for five more days following the DPP’s request. “Preliminary investigations have revealed Mauda’s wife was not sick and that the suspect never resided at Ruaka in Kiambu County as he claimed,” he said. “We forwarded the file to the DPP for advice and he directed that he be charged over the murder of Anyira and Gichuki.” He noted that Mr Mauda had been in police custody for 10 days but that police needed more time to tie loose ends before he is charged. Mr Ochoi declined Mr Mauda’s bail request, in which he pledged to go to the Nairobi Area police headquarters by July 24 to be charged officially. He also said he had been cooperating with the investigators. The businessman will answer to the murder charge on July 22.