The protracted land ownership row pitting Ramadhan Primary School in Isiolo and an Islamic organisation has taken a new twist after the latter started digging holes to erect beacons and delivered building materials. In blatant disregard to an ongoing matter in court, the group which claims ownership of 4.9 acres of the school land located about a kilometre past the Isiolo Referral Hospital, tasked tens of youths over the weekend to do the work while being guarded by some police officers. The school, which rests on 15 acres of land, previously donated four acres to Almasi School for Disabled while about two acres have already been encroached on by locals. While taking advantage of a recent mention of the case in a Meru court where they have sued the school’s management, the group reportedly colluded with a senior administrator and had the police officers deployed to the site. BUILD A MOSQUE The group, which says it wants to build a mosque, is claiming ownership of the area where the school’s playing ground and an ablution block are. County Director of Education Hussein Koriyow termed the incident as contempt of court, noting that the ongoing case was mentioned last Thursday and its hearing set for November 30, 2020. “No court order has been issued and whatever they (grabbers) are doing is an illegality and in total disregard of court proceedings,” said Dr Koriyow. When Nation visited the site, young men continued offloading building materials from a lorry while others were digging holes to erect beacons as one of the police officers sat on guard outside the school. WORK STOPPED Upon receiving information on what was going on, County Commissioner Herman Shambi immediately ordered that the work be stopped, saying it was illegal. The county commissioner confirmed that he was privy to fact that the group claimed to have been given a go ahead by one senior county administrator. “I had to put my feet down to stop the exercise. I am wondering who instructed the officers as there was no court order,” said Mr Shambi adding that he had summoned both parties to present their grievances to his office in the course of this week. The school’s headteacher Amina Jirma said the tussle threatens the expansion and growth of the institution which was started 24 years ago. “We want the group to let the court do its work,” said Ms Jirma. The education boss appealed to the government to speed up the issuance of title deeds to schools to help end land grabbing. “We submitted information last year and we are yet to get any response with regard to issuance of title deeds for our schools,” he told the Nation by phone.