President Kenyatta and ODM leader Raila Odinga could be in for tough times ahead after some MPs allied to Deputy President William Ruto warned that they will not support any agenda that is not in the public interest. The lawmakers, a majority of whom were kicked out of Senate and National Assembly leadership posts, say service to the people will be key now that they no longer have “the extra baggage” to push what the government wants. Nakuru Senator Susan Kihika, who was ousted as Senate Majority Whip, Monday said it will not be business as usual. “We are now more energised than ever. We will continue to fight vigorously for the people now that we do not have those positions that forced us to push in Parliament what the government wanted,” Ms Kihika, a close ally of Dr Ruto, said. She said the Building Bridges Initiative (BBI) report, which seeks to amend the Constitution to, among others, expand the Executive and change the system of government— is not important. UNNECESSARY BAGGAGE The report is expected in Parliament any time after the mandate of the Senator Yusuf Haji-led taskforce expired on June 30. However, Dr Ruto and his allies say expanding the Executive is adding unnecessary baggage to the people during these hard economic times. Ms Kihika and Soy MP Caleb Kositany said that BBI is not a priority to Kenyans, a signal that they will oppose the report in the House. “Whatever is in the interest of Wanjiku is what we will push for.  If there is an agenda that we deem not beneficial to the people we will oppose it. We have a duty through our roles as elected leaders to hold the government to account,” Ms Kihika said. Mr Kositany claimed that the DP still has the numbers inside and outside the House, only that the right moment will tell and not the political posturing by “those drunk with power.” “People are living a lie but when the time comes, you will see it for yourself. What I know is that we still have the numbers,” Mr Kositany said. The Soy MP noted that demotion of MPs perceived to be Dr Ruto’s allies was the most unfortunate thing to ever happen to Parliament. “They went all the way to outsource people from ODM and Kanu to chair House committees. That is wrong, especially noting that it was done to get some of us out of the way so that they get their own to support the BBI,” Mr Kositany said. MINORITY PARTIES National Assembly Minority Leader John Mbadi (Suba South) has never shied away from saying that House committees like Justice and Legal Affairs and Delegated Legislation needed MPs loyal to the BBI cause --. But according to the Soy MP, nowhere in the world will you find majority and minority parties in legislative Houses doing what is happening at the moment. Keiyo South MP Daniel Rono, another ally of the DP who was kicked out of Public Accounts Committee (PAC), disclosed to the Nation that the DP’s team is planning to sponsor a bill which deal with what he termed as “dictatorial tendency of political parties”. "Currently there are consultations among the Tanga Tanga brigades to decide who will sponsor a bill which will be tabled in Parliament within the span of the next two months so that in future, we will not have a replica of what happened for some of us that if you oppose something sponsored by your political party because it does not benefit your constituents, you are being threatened by de-whipping or expulsion. Our legal team is working on the bill at the moment," revealed Mr Rono. He added that they have agreed to remain united so that in case they do not agree with certain recommendations of various committees, they shoot them down in full plenary. The MP claimed that President Kenyatta’s intention is to protect some individuals hence he has decided to collude with Mr Odinga to place “Yes” men/women in committees which should deal with corruption in the executive. Unlike Ms Kihika and Mr Kositany, who appeared more abrasive in their Jubilee fallout politics, their colleagues Nelson Koech (Belgut) and Kimani Ichung’wah were rather diplomatic in their assessment of the recent purge against the DP Ruto allied MPs. “We remain Jubilee MPs despite our removal from committee leadership and being given the less influential ones. The President remains our leader and DP Ruto his deputy. Our loyalty is with them. It hasn’t changed,” Mr Koech said. The Belgut MP noted that the Jubilee manifesto launched ahead of the August 2017, general election remains the country’s economic, social and political agenda. JUBILEE AGENDA “We have the mandate of promoting the Jubilee agenda for a better Kenya,” he said. He advised his colleagues not to despair for being removed from the leadership of the two Houses and that of its committees. “As far as I am concerned, we should not really care about the committees we are given. Soon or later, they will realize that they still need us because we will do our best in those committees however people think they are less effective.” Mr Ichung’wah, who was removed from the powerful Budget and Appropriation Committee to that of Members Services and Facilities, said his job in the new committee was well cut out. “I want to assure members that I will work diligently to ensure that they are facilitated well to achieve their mandates,” Mr Ichung’wah, whose committee also oversights the Parliamentary Service Commission, said.