Bars and restaurants have opposed plans by the State to ban consumption of alcohol inside their premises, saying it will result in loss of revenues to the tune of Sh50 billion. Pubs, Entertainment and Restaurant Association of Kenya (Perak) national chairperson Alice Opee Wednesday said the plan will also result in about 500,000 job losses in the entire sector. “We have noted with concern the draft regulation by the Ministry of Health in circulation. If the proposal is approved, about 500,000 of our youths will be rendered jobless and businesses are likely to collapse,” said Ms Opee in an interview with the Nation Wednesday. DRAFT LEGAL NOTICE A draft legal notice by the Ministry of Health plans to bar the consumption of alcoholic drinks in restaurants, eateries, parking lots, entertainment joints, supermarkets or wines and spirits shops to tame the spread of coronavirus. The notice says no one should consume any alcoholic drink in public places and these include parks, restaurants, parking lots, eateries, bars, entertainment joints and supermarkets, among others. It also states that operating hours of any business establishment that deals in the same shall be between 9am and 7.30pm. A person who commits an offence under these rules shall, on conviction, be liable to a fine not exceeding Sh20,000 or to imprisonment for a period not exceeding six months or both. COST OF REOPENING Ms Opee termed the draft regulations illegal, saying restaurants and pubs have gone through a lengthy and tedious process to reopen their operations, a process that has cost individual operators between Sh250,000 and Sh1 million. She said the move will also see their sales drop by a substantial margin because they are currently only operating at 40 per cent capacity. “We were allowed to sell alcohol in our premises by the same State that now wants us to close shop. This is not right because we feel targeted,” she said. Health Cabinet Secretary Mutahi Kagwe permitted restaurants to reopen their operations in June up to 7.30pm but with a rider that they must observe social-distancing measures. He said hotels, among other guidelines, must place tables at least 1.5 metres apart and limit the number of patrons on each to four per 10 square metres.