Almost 90 percent of the elderly faithful did not attend  Sunday mass at the Cathedral Church of Christ the King Catholic Diocese of Nakuru after places of worship were reopened. However, the few who turned up for the mass at 7am, 8.30am, 9.30 and 10.30 were not turned away despite their age limit being past 58. President Uhuru Kenyatta had announced that senior citizens aged 58 years and above and children should stay at home as they are the most vulnerable to contracting coronavirus. However, speaking to the Nation at the church on Sunday, Father Lawrence Mbogo the administrator of the Cathedral Church of Christ the King Catholic Diocese of Nakuru said the few who arrived for the mass were allowed to worship. CELEBRATE MASS  “It is hard to turn away a worshiper who has come to pray and I would rather celebrate mass for that one person than tell that person to go back home,” said Fr Mbogo. He said the church was encouraging parents to take care of their children’s spiritual needs.    “We would not like children to come to church and get infected with coronavirus. If this happens, we shall have no one to come to church tomorrow just because a parent disregarded the government directives,” said Fr Mbogo. He thanked President Kenyatta for allowing the reopening of places of worship. He said the church was observing all the measures aimed at flattening the rising coronavirus infection curve in the country.  “We would not like the Catholic Church and particularly Christ The King Cathedral church in Nakuru to be a place where the virus is spreading fast. We want it to remain a safe place of worship by ensuring that all Ministry of Health guidelines are strictly observed,” said Fr Mbogo. 100 FAITHFUL He announced that the church, despite having a capacity of 1,500 worshippers per service, only allowed 100 faithful per mass on Sunday.   He, however, announced that church would open up to more people and maintain the physical distancing guidelines as it creates more worshipping places. “We have a hall at the church compound and we also have Christ The King Secondary School next door where worshippers could also pray on Sunday, we have enough priests,” added Fr Mbogo. The cleric said the number of worshipers in other small churches in the diocese would be determined by the size of the church and social distancing measures as issued by the government. Before entering the church compound, all worshipers’ temperature was taken at the gate. Ushers ensured they washed their hands before they were allowed into the church compound. While in the church, the worshipers observed the social distancing measures while singing was controlled.