The 127th $500,000 Runhappy Met Mile at Belmont Park on Saturday, is eagerly anticipating two absolute greats in Code of Honor, and, Mckinzie. As usual, an automatic ticket to the Breeders' Dirt Cup Mile in Keenland is up for grabs.  Also featured is the $400,000 Manhattan, $200,000 Suburban$150,000 Poker, and, $100,000 Victory Ride. America's Day Racing, produced by NYRA with FOX Sports, is being broadcast live, but still no spectators are allowed. John Velasquez is looking for a sixth success in the Met, but he has to deal with Mike Smith on McKinzie. It does not stop there. Javier Castellano is engaged for Vekoma, who has a legacy of amazing form. Mr. Freeze (Manny Franco), Hog Greek Hustle (Jose Ortiz), Warrior's Charge (Florent Geroux), Network Effect ( Irad Ortiz Junior), Medagli D'oro (Joel Rosario), are ripe and ready to challenge the two celebrities. All of these jockeys should now be familiar with our readers. *** It is an extremely elite weekend of competition. None other than the Investec Derby at Epsom is on, where nine of the runners have won on their previous outing - English King, Kameko, and, Russian Emperor are foremost in the betting. Ryan Moore has chosen to ride Mogul, even though he landed fourth in the King Edward VII Stakes. Draw is always important. None of the last ten winners drawn lower than Camelot, was in stall five. Endless statistics on that level. Nothing in the last ten years has done well with less than two runs. This means, Kameko, English King, Mogul, and, Russian Emperor, should be wire finishers, if they can survive Epsom's tough, undulating 2,400m course. Mythical (James Doyle) and, Amhran Na Bhfiann (William Buick), complete Derby declarations. Seamie Heffernan, travels to Britain for Russian Emperor before a quick light to France for Sunday's Prix de Diane on Peaceful. Not a free passage mind you, as quarantine laws are still effective. He will miss a couple of weeks upon returning. Also, application of the rule goes to Padriag Beggy on Vatican City, and, Emmet McNamara booked for Serpentine. He heads off with Seamie to ride Fort Myers in the Prix du Jockey Club Classic, where Seamie handles Order of Australia. Sounds complicating, but a rare treat for punters.