Governor Wycliffe Oparanya has stripped his deputy Prof Phillip Kutuma of the powerful Agriculture docket in changes he announced in his cabinet. Governor Oparanya also dropped the county executive for Education Joseph Obonyo Indire. Two weeks ago, the Kakamega county boss promised to make the changes to his team, saying he had received intelligence that some members of his cabinet were taking advantage of his absence to engage in suspect deals. He said he was disappointed that while he was engaged in national duties, his team was busy pursuing personal interests. The county chief said he was disappointed with performance of some of his cabinet members for failing to live up to expectation. Mr Oparanya appointed Joseph Lutomia the new county executive for Education. Mr Barasa Wangwe, who served as the county executive for Water, Environment and Natural Resources was named to head Kakamega County Micro-Finance Corporation in acting capacity in an apparent demotion. Several other county executives including the Finance and Planning county minister have been moved in the reshuffle announced at the County headquarters on Thursday. Dr Beatrice Sabana, who served as the county executive for Public Service and Administration has been elevated to the Finance, Planning and ICT docket. The Health Services docket has been taken over by Dr Collins Kizito Matemba. He replaces Ms Rachael Okumu, who had been moved to the Agriculture docket. Another big winner in the changes is Mr Robert Makhanu, who has been appointed the county executive for Lands, Housing, Urban Areas and Physical Planning. Mr Makhanu was in charge of Social Services, Youth and Culture. His place has been taken over by Mr Kassim Were Ali who was the county executive for Trade, Industrialisation and Tourism. The Roads, Energy and Public Works docket has been taken up by Mr Geoffrey Omulayi, who was Finance and Planning county executive before the changes. Mr George Lutomia, is the new county executive for Education, Science and Technology.