The Health ministry reported 379 more cases of the coronavirus in Kenya on Sunday, raising the case load to 10,105, about four months since the first case was reported. The country's first case of Covid-19 was announced on March 13 and later, the ministry projected that there would be 10,000 cases before the end of April. Dr Patrick Amoth, the acting director-general in the ministry, noted that this was the worst case scenario. In a statement on Sunday, Health Cabinet Secretary (CS) Mutahi Kagwe also announced that 49 more patients had been discharged from hospital. This raised the total number of recoveries to 2,881. One more patient has died, raising the death toll to 185. So far, the country has tested a total of 215,037 samples, including the 7,050 analysed in the last 24 hours. Of the new patients, 376 were Kenyans and three foreigners. Two hundred and fifty three were male and 126 female whereas the youngest patient was two years old and the oldest 97. CASE DISTRIBUTION In terms of counties, Nairobi yet again recorded the largest number of infections - 209. Then came Kiambu 49, Busia with 38, Migori with 19, Mombasa 16, Kajiado with 12 and Uasin Gishu with eight. Lamu County accounted for six infections, Machakos and Nakuru five each, Narok, Wajir and Kisumu two each and Garissa, isiolo, Kericho, Nyamira, Nyeri and Trans Nzoia one each. The capital city's cases were in Kibra (52), Lang'ata (45), Kamukunji (28), Dagoretti North (17), Makadara (17), Embakasi Central (nine), (Embakasi East (eight) and Westlands (seven). Dagoretti South, Embakasi West, Kasarani and Roysambu each had four cases; Ruaraka and Embakasi South two each and Mathare and Starehe one each. In Kiambu, Ruiru had 16 case, Kiambu Town 15, Lari seven, Kikuyu four, Limuru and Thika two each and Gatundu South, Kabete and Kiambaa one each. In Busia, the 38 cases were in Teso North (18), Matayos (15) and Teso South five. OTHER COUNTIES In Migori, Suna East and Kuria East each had seven cases while Kuria West had five; in Mombasa, Mvita had nine new patients, Jomvu four, Nyali two and Likoni one; in Kajiado, Kajiado East had seven new patients, Kajiado North three and Kajiado Central two, while all of Uasin-Gishu's cases were in Turbo and Lamu's in Lamu West. In Machakos, Kathiani recorded three cases and Athi River two whereas in Nakuru, four new patients were in Naivasha and one in Nakuru West. Kisumu's cases were in Muhoroni and Nyando; Narok's in Narok North, Wajir's in Wajir East, Nyamira's in Nyamira town, Nyeri's in Kieni and Trans-Nzoia's in Kiminini. 