Police in Moi’s Bridge have arrested five people on suspicion of being serial killers and defilers. Five children have been found murdered in the town in seven months. The arrests came after protests by Nominated Ward Representative Belinda Tirop and area residents. Locals say the crimes could be linked to ritual killings. Uasin Gishu county police chief Johnston Ipara praised the residents of Soy Sub-County for providing information that led to the arrests. He added that more people would be arrested and prosecuted. MISSING FOR A MONTH The county police boss said the five have already appeared in court as police pursue two other people still at large. “Detectives on the ground are gathering crucial information to link the pair to the ones who have already been arrested,” he said. Early in the year, a man and his daughter were arraigned for the murder of a 12-year-old girl. The two were freed when the prosecution said it could not link them to the heinous crime. Mr Ipara said those freed by courts are still being investigated. “We have not given up on the suspects. They could be rearrested,” the county police commander said. MUTILATED BODY Two weeks ago, the mutilated body of Grace Njeri, who had been missing for a month, was found in a thicket. This was the fifth child killing in six months. On December 31, Ms Sharon Sakwa’s daughter was killed in a similar fashion. The girl, Stacy Nabiswa, was a Standard Five pupil. She disappeared on New Year’s Eve and her body found near the railway line the following day. Ms Sakwa accused police of doing little to apprehend the perpetrators of the crimes. Thirteen-year-old Lucy Wanjiru was defiled and killed on January 16. Her mother, a greengrocer, was at the market when the murder occurred. FREED FOR LACK OF EVIDENCE Wanjiru’s stepfather was arrested but released later due to lack of evidence. The girl was a Standard Six pupil at Moi Township Primary School. Two weeks ago, local leaders and residents held a demonstration on the Kitale-Eldoret road to protest the killings. They accused security agents of doing little to stop them. In response to the protests, Mr Ipara urged residents to provide information that would lead to arrests and prosecutions. Mr Ipara, however, challenged parents to monitor their children. “Let us be responsible and watchful if we are to eradicate these incidents,” Mr Ipara said. He advised families to ensure children do not go to the shop or market unaccompanied.