Omar Lali, the boyfriend of the late Keroche heiress Tecra Muigai, is now a free man. Lali was set free Thursday by the High Court in Garsen after the Director of Public Prosecutions dropped the murder case against him to pursue an open inquest. The turn of events comes less than a week after the DPP decided to prefer murder charges against Lali. State Counsel Edie Kadebe told the court on Thursday that the government has resolved to pursue the events that led to the death of Tecra through other avenues, noting that the course is guided by interest for justice. "It is a matter we have discussed and explored each angle with a lot of keenness, and decided that for the sake of public interest and in the interest of justice, we pursue an open inquest," he said. Omar Lali (left), the boyfriend of the late Keroche Breweries heiress Tecra Muigai, after DPP dropped the murder case against him. PHOTO | STEPHEN ODUOR | NATION MEDIA GROUP Justice Roselyn Korir acknowledged the State's application, setting Lali free pending the inquest. "If found responsible in the inquest, the accused will be arrested once again and be charged as shall be advised," she said. On May 4, Lamu Principal Magistrate Allan Temba allowed the police to detain Lali for 21 days at the Lamu Police Station to enable them conduct comprehensive investigations. PHOTO | STEPHEN ODUOR | NATION MEDIA GROUP On Tuesday, the court had requested Lali undergo psychiatric examination at the Garissa Referral Hospital pending plea. The medical reports brought before court on Thursday verified that Lali was fit to take plea. Tecra sustained head injuries after she fell at a private house in Shella, Lamu Island and later died as she received treatment at a Nairobi hospital in May. Mr Lali was arrested by police on suspicion that he had pushed Ms Muigai to her death. There were reports that the two had an argument before she fell, claims Lali’s lawyer disputed. Lali was released on 27 May on a Sh300,000 bond and two sureties provided by his mother and brother-in-law, but was arrested on Monday for appearance in court. PHOTO | STEPHEN ODUOR | NATION MEDIA GROUP On July 14, High Court judge directed that Lali undergo a mental examination at the Garissa Referral Hospital before he takes plea. PHOTO | STEPHEN ODUOR | NATION MEDIA GROUP Lali was set free on July 16, 2020 by the High Court pending the open inquest. PHOTO | STEPHEN ODUOR | NATION MEDIA GROUP