The precious soul of an admirable Kenyan Asian personality took an unscheduled flight to her heavenly abode on June 20. A few days later, the dreadful flames of the funeral pyre leapt high, ushering her mortal being to reside with the departed soul in eternal peace. The precious soul, a symbol of courage and inspiration, is none other than Sardarni Harminder Kaur Saini, an illustrious educationist, philanthropist, former chairperson and convener of the Welfare Committee of Sikh Women’s Society, and treasurer of Sikh Sansar. Harminder, a trained educationist, started her passionate journey to serve humanity as a teacher in Nairobi’s City Primary and later together with her soul mate, they established the enviable Technical Institute Group of Schools. Harminder was a champion of women’s rights, who steered the committee of Sikh Women’s Society nobly, carrying forward the legacy of her predecessors as chairperson. SOCIAL WELFARE She upheld, explored, promoted and executed various projects and programmes not only for religious and social welfare but also activities relating to interfaith and inter-communal understanding. During her term, besides other initiatives, Sikh Women’s presented Maavan Thandian Chaavan (in the cool shadow of motherly love) an unforgettable cultural showing dedicated to Lord’s most loveable creation, the mother. Besides songs in praise of motherly love and sacrifices, the cultural showing also featured a short play that focused on a joint family household,  where the elderly are not treated with due respect. Yours truly was invited to direct the play, and cherishes fond memories of working with a very talented cast that received standing ovation from a capacity audience comprising women from all religious faiths. Although she was a dedicated follower of the Sikh religious faith, Harminder often glorified the tenants of interfaith understanding in her humanitarian and philanthropic expressions. HONESTY Due to the coronavirus pandemic, the Saini family had requested and refrained relatives, friends and admirers of the departed soul from visiting her home or attending the funeral rites last week. Instead, messages of condolences were received through social media. A symbol of honesty and integrity, Harminder is survived by her soulmate Kuldeep Singh, a celebrated educationist and legendary bhangra dancer. He brought fresh dimensions to her humanity serving passion and also fathered Raj and Roop, who are professionals in their own field of service to humanity. Our heartfelt condolences to the bereaved Saini family as we mourn a soul that was an inspiration to all who seek to selflessly serve humanity.