Sports has the power to captivate people, it is followed in the majority of the countries in the world, making it one of the most universal aspects of popular culture. The global interest and increased competitiveness of sports has led to elite clubs scouting for the best talent so they can be a cut above the rest. Football and athletics are the most followed sports across the globe. It is estimated that more than half of the world’s population associates with the two sports disciplines. Nations of the world have been working around the clock to develop infrastructure and give the youth a suitable environment to excel in these sports. It is for this reason that news of the upgrading of the Dawson Mwanyumba Sports Complex in Taita Taveta County elicited a lot of excitement. The news spread like a bush fire. The complex is Taita Taveta County Governor Granton Samboja’s flagship project. The stadium happens to be in the home county of Brooklyne Kazungu Mwadime, a 12-year-old Leicester Football Club player with Kenyan roots, and this adds to the excitement. Mwadime, who was born in the United Kingdom to Kenyan parents, plays for Leicester’s under-15 side. For a long time, people were accustomed to having good footballers coming from Western region and Nairobi. The fact that Mwadime’s mother hails from Mwatate in Taita Taveta County signals a new era in the larger Taveta County. It's a new dawn which should be factored in by football stakeholders in the county. Several athletics have also excelled from Taita Taveta County, which boasts of high altitude climate. That is the reason more why proper infrastructure should be a priority for the county government. Nation Sport visited the site last week and found renovation work under way at the Dawson Mwayumba Stadium. The facility, previously known as Wundanyi Stadium, will cost Sh66 million. According to the plan, the stadium will have a playing surface akin to the ones found in European countries. Once completed, the stadium will be the new home of Mwatate United Football Club, which will feature in the National Division One League next season. Taita Taveta County Chief Officer of Sports Laban Mwashigadi, Economic Advisor to the county government Mathew Njoroge and Loice Shali, an administer in the Office of the Governor were on site supervising the renovation work which is now in its second month. Athletics Kenya (AK) Vice Treasurer Kimoni Kisalu, who also doubles up as the AK Coast branch chairman, goes to the stadium on a daily basis to ensure the athletics track is done to international standards. The construction of the stadium wall is complete and the perimeter fencing, while work on the centre stand and the dressing rooms is in progress. “We were very excited as a county when Mwatate United was promoted to the Football Kenya Federation (FKF) Division One League meaning top clubs will be visiting the county for league matches,” Mwashigadi said of the 30,000 capacity stadium. He said that the changing rooms and washrooms should be ready in the next one month while the terraces will take another three months to be complete. Earth movers were on site breaking the higher ground on the eastern side which will have an eight-lane athletics track, a pitch and the terraces. Also being worked on is the drainage system to clear the swamp on the upper side of the stadium. Workers were busy spraying the overgrown papyrus reeds with a herbicide. “We expect to start receiving guests when the project is complete and this will open up the county to tourism when sports resume after they were cancelled due to the coronavirus pandemic,” Njoroge said. “This is a good reason why we also have space for a recreational facility inside the stadium where fans can have fun time and relax over a meal or drink as they wait for matches to begin,” the advisor said. Njoroge said the stadium, which will also be used for basketball, netball, volleyball, athletics and rugby matches, will open up the economy of the county. Mwashigadi said, “We are appealing to corporates who are willing to partner with us to come forward so that we can complete the stadium in good time. For now work is being done in phases due to inadequate funding.”