The UN Security Council must be applauded for its bold move of adopting Resolution 2535, its third on youth, which will anchor young activists seeking peace and security into a global agenda. The resolution calls for the protection of youth in civic and political spaces, which has been a monumental clarion call. The initiative is timely because of the growing concern about young people’s exclusion from formal peace and political processes. This is reinforced by deliberate moves by some states to increasingly shrink civic and democratic space with a huge detriment on young peace builders. The resolution also recognises the importance of the youth in humanitarian responses and mitigating against Covid-19. ELOQUENT RECOMMENDATIONS It also gives eloquent recommendations and actions that countries need to put in place to implement the previous two resolutions on youth peace and security: 2250 and 2419. On accountability, the resolution outlines a two-year reporting mechanism on the status of the youth in peace and security. This will help in tracking implementation, identify gaps, bring about commitment by state actors and, more importantly, offer remedial solutions in areas that are wanting. This is a significant milestone in advancing the youth agenda for peace and security. France and the Dominican Republic, which introduced Res. 2535, rightly argued that there was an imperative need and importance for partnering with and supporting youth to achieve peace and security goals. Res. 2535 has finally institutionalised youth peace and security in the UNSC, a feat that has eluded the world for years despite their critical role in driving the agenda. SECURITY PROCESSES Too often, young activists are targets of political violence with young women and men always the most vulnerable. This resolution calls for the upholding of their inalienable right to safety and condemns hate speech and incitement to violence. Res. 2535 is a step towards diversifying youth participation in peace processes as it acknowledges the values of the participation of largely marginalised groups — young women, refugee youth and internally displaced youth. It also recognises that structural barriers limit participation of young people in peace and security processes and calls upon all actors to increase inclusive representation of youth in the prevention and resolution of conflict and in peacebuilding. But more resolutions are not enough. Action must follow. There is a need to constantly reduce the gap and swiftly move to implement these resolutions effectively to ensure youth are properly involved in peace and security processes. Kenya should use its recently acquired non-permanent UNSC membership to prioritise implementation of the three resolutions on youth.  Mr Obonyo is a public policy analyst. raphojuma@hotmail.com