Hours before Felix Orinda alias DJ Evolve spoke for the first time since he was allegedly shot by Embakasi East MP Babu Owino six months ago, the controversial legislator was busy lighting fires on his social media pages. In his usual cantankerous tone, the MP took down anyone who attempted to remind him about DJ Evolve’s shooting while shouting to the world about how, it is the least of his worries, despite the fact that he is facing attempted murder charges. “Stop pushing for your funeral!” The MP replied to one of his followers Patrick Cheruiyot who had called him a “Future sharpshooter.” And to another of his followers Joseph Kinyanjui who tried to remind the MP that his attempted murder case is soon coming up, Mr Owino retorted “publicity is publicity.” This is how things have been for Mr Owino on the internet since January when he shot the DJ in the wee hours of a Saturday morning at the upscale B-Club along Galana road in Nairobi. If he is not boasting about his achievements, he is either fire-fighting claims of attempted murder or lighting fires. For Mr Orinda however, the last six months have been hell. Once a fast rising DJ plying his trade in one of the most popular night clubs in Nairobi, the Mr Orinda who appeared on NTV on Monday night was beaten, unable to do anything for himself and is now depending on God for justice. “I cannot move my hands past unfolding my fingers, so when I do not have them, I cannot do much as they were my tools of trade,” he said with difficulty, aided by a device connected to his throat. “the last six months ahve been hell. There’s nothing I can do for myself. I was really traumatised in the beginning, but I have learnt to live with it,” he said. “I left that to God and I’m waiting for the justice system to see what next” The internet immediately went ablaze. Predictably the security and judicial systems which had for the last six months forgotten about DJ Evolve’s shooting, swung to action. Yesterday afternoon the Director of Public Prosecutions (DPP) asked the Judiciary to fast track the hearing date for the case facing DJ Evolve’s alleged shooter-Mr Owino citing “public interest.” In the evening, officers from the Kilimani Directorate of Criminal Investigation led by their boss Fatuma Hadi, visited the DJ who is currently under the care of his mother and nurses at Thome Estate, Nairobi. Asked what their mission at the DJ’s home was, Ms Hadi said it was “related to the case.” But as the DJ continues to wait for justice, his family joins an increasing list of families whose lives have allegedly been shattered by sins of prominent personalities who continue to evade punishment, courtesy of a crooked justice system. “I hope I will get justice for my child. I only talk to my God. What I see is that my son’s life has been ruined,” DJ Evolve’s mother told NTV. To date, Mr Orinda’s family says they are yet to hear from the Embakasi MP, despite earlier reports that he had reached out to them hoping for an out of court settlement. And like the Orinda’s, Sharon Otieno’s family is also waiting for their date with justice. Ms Otieno,  a university student was found murdered in September 2018 and among those charged with her killing is Migori Governor Okoth Obado. For almost two years now, the hearing of the case is yet to start. But as her family and DJ Evolve’s wait for justice, others have not been too lucky after alleged perpetrators got off with what appeared to be slaps on their wrists. Starehe MP was in 2017, charged with causing death of motorcyclist Mugo Mwangi and his passenger Joseph Mwangi Kairia by dangerous driving. A Kirinyaga court fined him Sh40,000 or six months in jail . Comedian Inspekta Mwala (Davis Mwabili), was at the end of last year fined Sh30,000 or one year in jail for causing death by dangerous driving. In mitigation, the comedian apologised and asked for forgiveness from the victim’s family. Another famous person who got off easily for allegedly causing death by dangerous driving is pastor James Nganga. He was acquitted last year but the DPP has since appealed his acquittal.