The government has allocated Sh700 million for the completion of phase two of the Misikhu-Brigadier road in Bungoma County. The first phase cost Sh600 million. Roads, Transport and infrastructure Cabinet Secretary James Macharia James Macharia said Tuesday that tarmacking of the road would make it easier for farmers to transport their produce to the market. Construction of the first phase commenced under the administration of former governor Ken Lusaka in 2016 but was completed by the current governor, Mr Wycliffe Wangamati. Mr Macharia said the national government was committed to fulfilling its promises to develop the region. Mr Macharia said he had been instructed by President Uhuru Kenyatta to ensure that the road was completed on time: “I will be checking on the progress personally.” The CS revealed that roads and airstrips worth Sh9 billion were being constructed in Bungoma, adding that the infrastructure projects will help boost the local economy and create jobs. The works on the road, which in total will cost Sh1.3 billion, will involve tarmacking and construction of three bridges and culverts at all access points. The national government had agreed to equally share the cost for the tarmacking with the county government. The devolved unit was to tarmack the road from Brigadier to Naitiri while the national government was to complete the Naitiri-Misikhu stretch. The 40km Misikhu-Naitiri-Brigadier road connects Bungoma to Kakamega, Uasin Gishu and Trans-Nzoia counties. The road in Tongaren also cuts through agriculturally-rich Webuye East, Kiminini and Lugari. Devolution CS Eugene Wamalwa said that factories in Western that are financially crippled will be bailed out to revamp the region economy. He said Sh220 million has been set aside to rehabilitate the Kitale airstrip in Trans Nzoia. Mr Wamalwa said that President Kenyatta was keen on reviving factories. Senate Speaker Ken Lusaka said the road in Tongaren will boost agricultural production by linking farmers to markets. Tongaren MP Eseli Simiyu urged the state to complete building the road from Brigadier to Matunda. Other leaders present were Mr John Munyes, Trans Nzoia senator Ole Mbito, assembly deputy speaker Charles Ngome, Trans-Nzoia speaker Joash Werunga, and a host of MCAs.