Orange Democratic Movement (ODM) leader Raila Odinga, who is on a 21-day medical leave, has been working from home, including participating in government business. According to close allies, the former Prime Minister continues to get briefings from government officials and is in constant consultation with his ‘Handshake’ partner, President Uhuru Kenyatta. Before three Cabinet secretaries embarked on their development tour of western Kenya early this week, Mr Odinga is said to have received the briefing at his Karen home from Devolution CS Eugene Wamalwa. The ODM leader has also been instrumental in the reorganisation of the National Assembly and Senate committees. WARRING FACTIONS Last week, he also took time to reconcile warring factions in his party in a dispute pitting his deputy Wycliffe Oparanya against Secretary-General Edwin Sifuna. The two had fallen out over the ongoing tours spearheaded by Mr Oparanya and Mr Wamalwa in Western, with Mr Sifuna leading youthful leaders from the region to launch a rival faction dubbed Mulembe Youth Movement. Mr Odinga has increasingly entrenched himself in Jubilee after the March 9 political pact with the President that gave rise to the Building Bridges Initiative. Political analyst Javas Bigambo says President Kenyatta brought on board Mr Odinga to “tame his rising defiance”. “That co-option had to come with veiled power that is unstructured and unofficial, hence his apparent influence in government circles,” he told the Nation. WIELDS A LOT OF POWER Senate Majority Chief Whip Irungu Kang’ata said Mr Odinga wields a lot of power in the Jubilee administration and now even has the ears of the President’s men in the party and government. “In several societies, there are often persons who don’t have formal positions but they wield great power. For Raila Odinga, the Handshake has enhanced his voice and impact,” Mr Kang’ata told the Nation yesterday. He compared Mr Odinga’s influence to Deng Xiaoping in China between 1979 and 1990: “Xiaoping wasn’t the President but everyone knew his impact.” But Mr Odinga’s dalliance with Jubilee has not gone down well with Deputy President William Ruto’s allies, who feel the ODM leader has edged out the country’s second in command. Jubilee Deputy Secretary-General Caleb Kositany said Mr Odinga’s role in government remains unclear and is “part of the confusion that came with the Handshake”. “He has no role and we don’t know what those ministers go to tell him,” Mr Kositany said. NO MAJOR ROLE Belgut MP Nelson Koech said Mr Odinga has no major role in the Jubilee administration. “He is not calling any shots. He is simply posturing but real power lies elsewhere,” Mr Koech said. Elgeyo-Marakwet Senator Kipchumba Murkomen said the relationship is designed to subvert democracy: “We know that every time a popular leader has stood firm with the people, the system has lost and the people have triumphed,” he said.