People living with disabilities in Nakuru County have something to smile about this financial year after the devolved unit boosted its disability fund with Sh27.5 million. Apart from training and empowering those living with disabilities in the county, the funds will be used to buy wheel chairs. The funds will enable them start income generating projects such salons and poultry keeping among other projects. From the fund, organised groups will  get start-up capital to improve their livelihoods by venturing in business, farming or any other venture of their choice. “The Governor Lee Kinyanjui administration seeks to make disabled persons in the county who face financial challenges, self-reliant and we are optimistic of achieving this goal,” said Nakuru County Executive in charge of Gender, Sports, Youth, Culture and Social Services Lucy Kariuki. The funding is coming at time when thousands of people living with disabilities have received relief food to cushion them against the effects of coronavirus pandemic in the county. According to Ms Kariuki, some of the 55 wards such as Subukia had many bed-ridden persons. “We visited Subukia Ward and we came across very needy cases where some of the boys could not walk,” said Ms Kariuki. She said the distribution of food in the wards saw many mothers who have been hiding their disabled children come out. “This was not the case as in the past as many parents hid their children. This denied them an opportunity to get any assistance from the county including medical care,” she said. Ms Kariuki revealed that one person living with disability from Soin Ward in Rongai Sub-County was taken to Nakuru Level Five Hospital for treatment. The food distribution exercise was also an eye opener to the department as it revealed that some of the disabled persons had no national identification documents. “Many parents with children with disabilities don’t see the need to apply for identification cards once they attain the age of 18,” said Ms Kariuki. She said the county will liaise with the national government to ensure disabled persons get ID cards. “The county will ensure all persons above 18 years whether disabled or not get the vital document to enable them access services from the county and national government,” she added.