The Health ministry on Monday announced 181 more cases of the coronavirus in Kenya as well as 127 more recoveries and four more deaths. These figures, in a statement from Health Cabinet Secretary Mutahi Kagwe, raised the total number of Covid-19 cases in Kenya to 8,067, the total number of recoveries to 2,414 and the total number of deaths to 164. The ministry said it had tested 2,131 samples in 24 hours, bringing the total of samples tested in the country to 191,394. CASE DISTRIBUTION CS Kagwe said two of the new patients were foreigners and 179 Kenyans, with the youngest aged four months and the oldest 79 years. Men numbered 123 and women 58. Nairobi once against accounted for the highest number of cases with 134 and then came Kiambu with 19, Mombasa with nine and Kajiado with six. Machakos also recorded six cases while Lamu had three, Murang'a two and Uasin Gishu and Kirinyaga one each. In Nairobi, Dagoretti North and Embakasi East had 21 cases each, Embakasi South 16, Westlands 11, Starehe nine, Mathare eight, Roysambu eight, Lang'ata six and Embakasi Central five. Embakasi West, Kasarani and Makadara also had five cases each while Dagoretti South, Embakasi North and Kamukunji had three each and Ruaraka one. In Mombasa, Jomvu recorded three cases, Kisauni and Mvita two each and Likoni and Nyali one each, while all of Lamu's cases were reported in Lamu West. In Kiambu, Thika accounted for seven cases, Limuru and Ruiru three, Kabete and Kiambu Town two each and Juja and Kikuyu one each. Kajiado's cases were in Kajiado North (three), Kajiado East(two) and Kajiado West(one) while all of Machakos' six cases were in Athi River. In Murang'a the two cases were recorded in Kiharu whereas in Uasin the single case was in Ainabkoi. Kirinyaga's case was in Mwea East. UHURU'S ANNOUNCEMENTS Earlier on Monday, President Uhuru Kenyatta made several key announcements related to Kenya's management of local infections. The President said the cessation of movement order that barred entry into and out of Nairobi, Mombasa and Mandera counties will end Tuesday at 4 am. He, however, extended the nationwide curfew, that runs from 9pm to 5am, by a further 30 days. Mr Kenyatta further said that all places of worship will also commence phased reopening in strict conformity with all applicable guidelines. However, he noted that nobody under 13 or over 58 years should be allowed to attended the services. In what will be a relief to aviation industry players and workers, local air travel shall resume July 15 under Ministry of Health and Transport guidelines. International travel on the other hand will resume August 1.