President Uhuru Kenyatta Monday conferred upon 24 lawyers the rank of senior counsel, among them former vice president Kalonzo Musyoka and ex-Justice minister Martha Karua. Others honoured by the President were former Director of Public Prosecution Philip Murgor, deputy DPP Dorcas Oduor, Central Bank of Kenya board chairman Mohamed Nyaoga, ex-President Kenyatta’s constitutional advisor Abdikadir Mohamed and Rarieda MP Otiende Amollo. Also in the list were renowned family lawyer Judy Thongori; former chief executive of the Kenya National Human Rights Commission (KNHRC) Patricia Nyaundi; Wilfred Nderitu, who is remembered for having represented victims at the International Criminal Court (ICC) in the case against Deputy President William Ruto; and veteran lawyers Fred Ngatia and Waweru Gatonye. Mr Ngatia and Mr Gatonye led different sides during the 2017 presidential election petition at the Supreme Court. OTHERS HONOURED Also joining the exclusive club were lawyer Kioko Kilukumi, renowned arbitrator John Ohaga, Rautta Athiambo, veteran lawyer Prof Albert Mumma, Pravin Bowry, the former Assistant Director (Legal Services) of the Kenya Anti-Corruption Commission (KACC), John Chigiti, as well as Pakash Nagpal, Fackson Kagwe, Beautah Siganga, Kiragu Kimani, Taib Ali Taib, and Zehrabanu Janmohamed. “The presidential prerogative to confer the rank and dignity of senior counsel is set out under the Advocates Act,” State House Spokesperson Kanze Dena-Mararo noted in a statement. She explained: “The rank of senior counsel is conferred in accordance with the recommendation of the Committee on Senior Counsel, to the Advocates of the High Courts of Kenya, who have distinguished themselves by rendering exemplary service in the legal and public service arena.” LSK DECISION In making the changes, the President ignored the decision of the Law Society of Kenya, which in May cancelled the conferments, and ordered a fresh process. “Concerns were and continue to be raised on the validity of the Advocates (Senior Counsel Conferment and Privileges) Rules, 2011. The rules are indicated to have been amended twice in 2012 and 2014 without public participation,” LSK President Nelson Havi stated said at the time, citing what he said was a May 11 decision of the LSK Council. “All these issues impact negatively on the process of recommendation for conferment made in 2019 and intended to be made in 2020, a call for applications in respect of which was made to members on February 24, 2020.” The recruiting committee which identified the 24 was chaired by Supreme Court judge Justice Mohamed Ibrahim and submitted its report on August 26, 2019.