It is said that tough times don’t last but tough people do. Although the coronavirus pandemic has disrupted so many things, it too shall pass and we will need to move on. However, things may never be the same again, so we will have to make some adjustments. The job market will be even more competitive, and certain skills will be more sought after than others. The only way to stay relevant is to acquire the following skills. Leadership After the pandemic is brought under control, the masses will rely on their leaders to bring them together and rebuild the economy. You can nurture your leadership skills by simply organising the community around you to raise funds and help those who have been badly affected by Covid-19. You could also take charge at home when your parents are away and ensure that your siblings are well behaved. As Ronald Reagan said, the greatest leader is not necessarily the one who does the greatest things. He is the one that gets the people to do the greatest things. Tech skills According to Forbes magazine, this pandemic has led to the fastest digital transformation of companies in history. It has forced us to embrace and adapt to working from home in just a matter of weeks. Technological skills are no longer an added advantage but a requirement. After this is over, skills in technology will be in great demand. An understanding of concepts such as data science, cloud computing, programming and cybersecurity will certainly put you ahead of the rest when looking for a job. Luckily, such skills can be acquired easily through online courses. Communication and emotional Intelligence Emotional intelligence is the ability to identify and manage one’s own emotions, as well as the emotions of others. Communication is the act of transferring information from one place, person or group to another. Whereas many know how to communicate in person, not everyone knows how to make an impression in an online meeting, or how to pitch ideas online, or what language to use when drafting official emails, or how to create effective and engaging presentations. In future, job interviews are likely to be done online and you need to learn how to conduct yourself in such an exercise. It is also important to be empathetic to other colleagues since most people are still adjusting to the new normal. Others may be enduring family related problems that affect their performance. Creativity and Innovation Many of the companies selling sanitisers at the moment were not producing them before the pandemic. They have quickly modified their production lines to meet the demand in the market and also to stay afloat. Such creative and innovative ways of dealing with unprecedented situations will make you attractive to any employer. Many companies will need to reinvent their products, strategies and operations after the pandemic in order to meet the changed demands. Flexibility and Adaptability Some of the roles currently existing may soon be automated, leading to job losses. Only those who can continually reinvent themselves, gain new skills and adapt to the changes will survive. Job juggling Majority of Google’s workforce are employed on short term contracts and hired only on need-to basis. Many companies will definitely go this route in future to cut costs. To succeed in this new arrangement, you will need to secure a number of part time jobs, then continually increase your skill set in order to get more and even better paying projects. Skills in entrepreneurship are an advantage as you will be managing your own business without anyone’s supervision. Additionally, you will need to build networks, a reputation, and know how to market yourself.