Musalia Mudavadi’s Amani National Congress (ANC) party has dismissed its Vihiga branch chairman barely three days after he hosted ODM deputy leader Wycliffe Oparanya at his home. Officials convened a meeting at ANC’s county office on Monday, where branch secretary William Kaisha announced the changes, accusing Mr Julius Ochiel of sabotaging  the party’s leaders and activities in Mr Mudavadi's home county. He was replaced with Emuhaya MP Omboko Milemba. The party officials accused Mr Ochiel of snubbing key party events and failing to convene meetings, affecting ANC’s dominance in the region. He was also put on the spot for nominating his wife, Rebecca Ochiel, to the county assembly, which would be a case of nepotism. "We have decided not to be pulled back by one individual. We don't know if he (Ochiel) is still a member or not but our main aim was to replace him as our chairman," Mr Kaisha said. WESTERN VOTE The change came amid an intensified political battle for control of the Western region, pitting Mr Oparanya and Devolution Cabinet Secretary against Mr Mudavadi and Bungoma Senator Moses Wetangula. The ANC officials further said the ‘Western Sky Team’ being led by Mr Oparanya and Mr Wamalwa was bent on sabotaging Mr Mudavadi in the vote-rich region and was using select party officials to paint him as inept. They warned the Oparanya-Wamalwa team against fanning divisions in Vihiga. While visiting Mr Ochiel at his home last Friday, Mr Oparanya said they had been friends since their time as officials of the AFC Leopards football club. "We are not looking at the political parties we belong to. Parties are used to seek power and are like matatus that people board and alight from. Ochiel is an ANC chairman but this does not stop us from being friends," the Kakamega governor said. OFFICIAL NOTICE The officials said Mr Ochiel was given a chance to explain his actions but failed to do so while Mr Ochiel said he was yet to get any official communication from the party about his replacement. He denied that there was something sinister about his meeting with Mr Oparanya, saying it was not political. "ANC believes the visit by Oparanya was political. I am waiting to hear from the party officially before I can make further comments," he told the Nation. The officials said they followed the party’s Constitution in replacing Mr Ochiel. "We are here as branch officials to inform our members that Emuhaya MP Omboko Milemba is our new chairman. We have done this in line with our party Constitution. We feel honored by Omboko for accepting to take this position,” said Mr Kaisha. He added, "Vihiga is 100 per cent ANC and we are fully behind our party leader Musalia Mudavadi. We want him to succeed President Uhuru Kenyatta and restore this country's ailing economy.” DIRECTION Mr Victor ijaika Bulemi, secretary of ANC MCAs’ caucus, said the developments were aimed at giving the party direction. "We have a new chairman who has the interests of the party at heart. This (Vihiga) is the home of our party leader," said the Wamuluma/Lugaga ward representative. Mr Ijaika complained that some party officials at the grassroots were not respectful of the top leadership. "Ochiel was made chairman and went ahead to nominate his wife to the county assembly but then he goes ahead to disrespect the party and its leaders … those who are feeding him," he said. Mr Milemba is widely accepted in Emuhaya and Luanda constituencies so his appointment is expected to see a speedy improvement in the party’s popularity in the region. He too is from the Bunyore community, which forms the second largest voting bloc in Vihiga after the Maragoli. Mr Kaisha explained that the choice of Mr Milemba was tactical and in line with the party’s aspirations for the 2022 General Election.