Taking part in street demonstrations, where you are sure to either get beaten, tear gassed, robbed, or all three, is not for the faint hearted. In fact, judging by the manner in which street protests today often turn into needless riots and looting sprees, it may seem that the generation of fearless but prudent human rights defenders such as the late Wangari Maathai, Muthoni Nyanjiru and Martin Shikuku are long gone. But a fresh, relentless and determined crop of young activists is emerging, and they are willing to go the long haul to fight for jus-tice. Wanjiru Waithera. WAITHERA WANJIRU, 27 At her age, Wanjiru has rescued more than 20 children in Kayole from being married off, and led numerous protests in the country. She has been arrested several times and at one point, she ran a campaign on Twitter dubbed #freebetty to agitate for her release from police custody. Surprisingly, she detests being identified as a female activist. “There is no such thing. You are either an activist or not. When the po-lice arrest me, they don’t do it because I am a woman, but because I am out in the streets fighting for Kenyans’ rights,” she says. Wanjiru’s path may have been influenced by her father who was a popular Mau Mau fighter. This, however, is a topic her family members don’t like talking about. “Growing up, I witnessed a lot of injustices around me. My grandmother was disinherited and no one helped her. My father lost his life in mysterious circumstances and no one did anything about it. I saw activism as the only means of helping myself and others get what we deserve. “When I was pursuing journalism in university, I was once sent to Kayole to cover the story of a child who was being repeatedly molested yet no action had been taken. I got the parents of the child to speak on record and the story elicited a lot of reactions online. That marked the beginning of my life as an activist.” BETTER GOVERNANCE In her initial years in advocacy, Wanjiru channeled her energy into pushing for better governance, and fighting against early child-hood marriages in Kayole where she was living at the time. She also mobilised funds and built a tennis court to encourage youth in the area to abandon crime and embrace sports. So, who funds her activities? “This issue always comes up. Unlike some young people who often get used by politicians, we fight for sensible causes and we never riot or destroy property. The youth used by politicians to cause mayhem in cities don’t even know what they want. I don’t want funding, I just want more people to join me in fighting for the rights of all Kenyans,” she says and adds: “The worst thing about being an activist is that people fear you. Even getting a job offer is hard because people have preconceived perceptions about you. In fact, I once lost a job because I am an activist. “Information is important in activism so I spend a lot of time documenting what is happening around the country and also collecting and distributing useful contacts and information. Activist Kimani Nyoike. KIMANI NYOIKE “The trauma that comes with witnessing violence and loss of life can leave permanent scars on one’s life. I was only six years old when I witnessed my first incident of political violence. In 1992, just before the general elections, violence erupted in Rift Valley. At the time, my family lived in Kesses Constituency. The entire neighbourhood came under attack, with homes owned by individuals from my ethnic community being the main target of the assailants.” he says. “On December 2007, after yet another deeply divisive general election, we were, for the second time, chased away from our home. Many of my friends’ houses were burned down in the melee and we ended up being refugees in our own country. After those two incidents, I felt like doing something to eliminate divisive politics and ethnic violence,” he explains. Kimani utilised the free internet access he had on campus grounds to learn as much as she could about how to succeed as an activist, and also to connect with other local activists. In 2010, he attended Picha Mtaani photo exhibition in Parklands where he met renowned activist Boniface Mwangi. A year later, Kimani took the streets for the first time. “The first demonstration I attended was in 2011 and had been dubbed Bury the Vulture. We planned to take 49 black coffins into Parliament buildings when the House was in session. The coffins represented the 49 years since independence in which the politicians had operated with impunity. “After that day, I got the courage and motivation to fight against tribalism, poor governance, impunity, corruption and injustice. I al-so created a civic platform dubbed Maskani Ya Taifa thanks to mentorship from activists such as Mutemi wa Kiama,” he explains. SELF-DISCOVERY When he completed his journalism studies, Kimani chose to continue being an activist because he felt that something needed to be done to prevent the frequent cases of human rights violations. As he kept on learning and researching, his life began to change as he inched closer to what he considers a period of “self-discovery”. He dropped his English name as well as his Christian religion. “Those two were just tools of imperialism and neocolonialism that were used to erase our African identity. Birth and naming were important aspects of our African tradition,” he says. Almost all popular activists in Kenya have faced police brutality in the course of their work. Kimani has been a victim too. “My worst experience came in October 2019 when I was arrested in the Nairobi central business district alongside six other people and accused of robbery with violence. We had just wrapped up a successful protest march dubbed Sina Job on rising unemployment rates. That was the first time I came face to face with police brutality. “The seven of us were assaulted in full public view by six gun-wielding policemen, then taken to the police station. Such things not only affected us physically but mentally too. We all had to go for counselling after the ordeal. It also left our loved ones really scared,” he says. In all this, Kimani maintains that if you want your message to reach the authorities fast, going to the streets will help you achieve that. “Throughout the world, citizens have managed to challenge existing systems through demonstrations. I believe that is the most powerful means of advocacy. I have never regretted taking part in peaceful protests. So far, Kimani has encouraged hundreds of young activists to agitate for a more just society through training, and he regularly leads pithy conversations online on matters of national importance. “As Kenyans, we need to redefine our country’s leadership. “Kenya has a history of political betrayal that begun right before independence. Our leaders have taken advantage of tribal politics, impunity, Afro-Imperialism and Afro-colonialism to secure a stranglehold on us. “To move forward, we should identify good leaders who can help us all move towards a more prosperous and people-driven future. We must come together to define our collective destiny.” Jonathan Kioko. JONATHAN KIOKO I come from a modest family and I know that I am privileged in many ways compared to most Kenyans. I am a third year student of International Relations at USIU (United States International University) and I studied Human Rights as a core unit. “In the course of our studies, my classmates and I visited the Kenyan Human Rights Commission offices, the Mathare social justice centre and even met the managing director of Amnesty Kenya. During that period, we discovered so many things. I realised that even though we were educated, we were ignorant of the social realities happening in our own country.” After turning the idea over in his head, Jonathan started the Educated Movement, an online platform whose aim is to educate the middle class and rich people about what those living in the slums go through, and how it affects them. “In the beginning, our main focus was on police brutality but now, I am advocating for socialist causes such as proper housing, good water and sanitation and bridging the gap of inequality. I am now a social activist. Because he attended a private institution, Jonathan escaped the teargas that almost every university student breathes in at least once in the course of their studies. Protesting on the streets with policemen throwing teargas canisters all over, is actually the scariest thing he has ever done. “Participating in demos has two sides to it. Sometimes it gets so exciting and thrilling, especially when you see so many Kenyans coming out to support a common cause. However, it can also get really scary and traumitising especially when policemen start beating people and throwing teargas. “I get disturbed whenever I hear someone say that I or other activists have been paid to cause mayhem. Not everyone understands why we go on the streets to demonstrate, yet we try to create awareness and draw attention to the injustices happening in our country. Currently, Jonathan is focused on collecting as much information as possible and putting it in a website so that the public can easily access information on issues such as police brutality. In the next few years, he hopes to register an outfit that will help victims of human rights abuse get the justice they deserve without having to depend on the people in power.