Two people were gunned down Saturday following a demonstration at the Garissa Livestock Market. County Commissioner Meru Mwangi confirmed the incident but said he was yet to receive a full report. Witnesses said the incident took place as police officers searched for two people said to be terror suspects. "When they found them inside a car, they resisted arrest. That was when residents started shouting and fighting the police, causing chaos that led to demonstrations," said Ali Abdi, a trader. Another trader, Mariam Kheiry, said two suspects ran towards a hotel but police followed them. "We heard gunshots in the direction of the hotel. We found police had shot two people who were seated at the hotel after missing the initial suspects," she said. BRUTALITY Following the shootings, the area’s leaders demanded action via social media, accusing police of brutality. "I condemn the cold-blooded and heinous murder of two innocent Kenyans at Garissa Livestock Market by the police. The rogue killer cops must be brought to book," said Governor Ali Korane. Garissa Women Representative Anab Gure urged Inspector-General of Police Hilary Mutyambai to intervene. "Police have killed two innocent people. The same people in service are the ones murdering Kenyans ruthlessly in broad daylight," she said. IPOA PROBE Following the uproar, the Independent Policing Oversight Authority (Ipoa) issued a statement saying it had opened an investigation into the incident. The probe by its Rapid Investigations Team will establish the circumstances that led to the shootings. Ipoa will make recommendations including prosecution of the officers involved, should it be found that they acted inappropriately. Chairperson Anne Makori called for calm amid the investigation and the reporting of complaints to the authority through toll-free line 1559. ARREST MADE On Saturday night, Northeastern Regional Commissioner Nick Ndalana reported an officer from the Directorate of Criminal Investigations (DCI) had been arrested over the shootings. Mr Ndalana said the officer was taken to Garissa Police Station and that a team from Internal Affairs would launch an investigation on Monday. "The officer was named by locals who witnessed the incident," he said.