Deputy President William Ruto's allies have now questioned the motive behind delays in the release of Building Bridges Initiative (BBI) report. Jubilee Party deputy-secretary Caleb Kositany, who is also Dr Ruto’s de-facto spokesperson, on Sunday  accused President Uhuru Kenyatta and ODM leader Raila Odinga of taking Kenyans for a ride by keeping silent on when the report will be released. The Soy MP claimed that there is a political game behind the delays, arguing that as Tanga Tanga brigade, they are ready for any recommendation of the Garissa Senator Yusuf Haji-led taskforce. "They should release the BBI report rather than trying to play politics with it, we know they are still looking for those who will oppose it, let them bring it, no one will oppose it," he told the Nation. "The taskforce has completed its work, where is this report? Why are they taking long before releasing it?" COMPLETED REPORT Mr Haji’s team on June 30 announced that it had completed its report, and that it would hand the much-awaited document to President Kenyatta and Mr Odinga when the two are ready. “We have finished our report but we will wait for them (President Kenyatta and Mr Odinga) to give us a date that suits them both so that we can hand it over to them,” Mr Haji told the Nation recently. Already, it has emerged that the handover of the report to the duo has been delayed by Mr Odinga's illness which saw him travel to Dubai for a minor back surgery. Kenyans will have to wait until he returns for the report to be released. Last week, the former prime minister, in a video post shared by his daughter, promised a return to the political scene soon. But Keiyo South MP Daniel Rono told the Nation that their recent revelation that they are banking on the expanded executive to scheme for coalitions ahead of 2022 general elections might have worried both the president and the ODM supremo. COALITION He claimed the proponents of BBI have been driving a narrative that DP Ruto was against efforts to unite the country using the report, noting that since DP is keen on it, his political nemesis might be scheming on what to use next before it is released. “They have been taken back to the drawing board after it emerged that DP plans to use the BBI to chart his coalition before 2022 and this might have scared them, they thought we would oppose it," said Mr Rono. For Belgut MP Nelson Koech, the release of the BBI report is not a priority at the moment when the country is feeling the pinch of coronavirus on the economy. Mr Koech claimed that the entire BBI process has never been inclusive and transparent as the work of defunct Constitution of Kenya Review Commission (CKRC), and that it is spearheaded by individuals pushing for personal interests. "Whether it is delayed or not is not an issue for the people of Kenya because it is nowhere near their priorities," said the Belgut MP. This comes after DP's foot soldiers last week suddenly softened their stance on expanding the executive, as is expected to be proposed by the BBI team. Some of the DP’s supporters are now supporting the proposal, saying it will be of great benefit to their man ahead of the 2022 polls. The report is expected to maintain the president as the head of state and government, but propose the creation of a prime minister’s office to be appointed by MPs. Kimilili MP Didmus Barasa, one of key figures in Dr Ruto's camp, said if the executive is expanded, it will give the DP a better opportunity to accommodate his coalition partners.