Hosting major global events, be they sporting championships, conferences or trade fairs comes with monumental benefits for a country. In particular, hosting major sporting championships such as the Fifa World Cup, World Athletics Championships or the Olympic Games is an opportunity for the host country to demonstrate its ability to undertake complex projects and to play host to top athletes from all over the world. For instance, hosting the Fifa World Cup is an intricate undertaking that requires heavy financial and logistical input by the host country. At the heart of planning is a Local Organizing Committee and an inter-ministerial team that pull in the same direction. I was privileged to attend the 2018 Fifa World Cup, and from the outset, I realised first-hand that hosting such a tournament needs heavy infrastructural investment that involves construction of world-class stadiums, roads, airports and hotels. But the benefits are long-term. Fifa’s Legacy Programme ensures that every such tournament leaves behind immense benefit for the host country’s teams, youth and athletes. The tournament leaves behind a good transports infrastructure (roads, train stations and airports), modern stadiums and trained manpower capable of organising future tournaments. For instance, Fifa’s Legacy Programme is aimed at furthering the professional development of young people in the host country of the World Cup so that the skills and know-how that go into broadcasting the world’s biggest single sport event are passed on to the next generation of professionals. According to the world football governing body, the 2018 Fifa World Cup saw a total of 312 students from fields as diverse as TV production, media, communications, foreign languages, international relations, IT, and electrical and civil engineering being assigned roles matching their particular fields and skill-set. Since the 1998 World Cup held in France, Fifa has offered paid internships under its Legacy Programme in subsequent editions. But such benefits start with putting in place strong bids backed by firm financial commitment from the government. According to leading consultancy group ValuStrat, Russia spent a total of 14.2 billion US dollars (Sh1.52 trillion). Most of the money was invested in stadium construction, transport and accommodation. Hosting major championships is also an opportunity for the host country to showcase its tourism potential. According to ValuStrat, some 2.6 million Russian fans watched the 2018 Fifa World Cup, with an estimated 3.5 billion fans watching the tournament on TV and via online streaming. Some 3.6 billion people watched the 2016 Summer Olympics. With global media beaming the tournament live, the host country has a chance to advertise itself as a top tourist destination open to guests from the whole world. And the visiting fans have a chance to sample the offerings firsthand. For instance, Fifa approximates that 570,000 foreign fans and 700,000 Russian fans attended the 2018 Fifa World Cup. Visiting fans spent approximately 5,000 to 8,000 US dollars (between Sh536,950 and Sh751,730) in the duration of the tournament. That is a big boost to the tourism sector through direct income to hotels, restaurants and national parks. This year, Kenya was programmed to host the World Under-20 Athletics Championships, the World Rally Championship Safari Rally, and the opening leg of 2020 Continental Tour. Kenya was due to reap big from hosting these competitions, but Covid-19 happened, throwing everything into disarray. Indeed sports activities have been disrupted globally, leading to postponement and cancellation of various championships. Let’s take solace in the first stanza of Jonathan Kariara’s poem “Grass Will Grow:” If you should take my child Lord, Give my hands strength to dig his grave, cover him with earth, Lord send a little rain, for grass will grow. Indeed grass will grow. Sports activities will thrive again once coronavirus has been contained and Kenya will reap big from hosting global sporting events. After hosting the World Under-20 Athletics Championships, it would be good for us to graduate in style and hopefully win the rights to host the 2025 World Athletics Championships. Mwamba is a Senior Sub-editor at the Nation Media Group. jmwamba@ke.nationmedia.com