ANC leader Musalia Mudavadi has accused his opponents of using police to orchestrate a campaign to frustrate his 2022 presidential bid, but has said their tactics will not derail him. Mr Mudavadi accused his political opponents of invoking President Uhuru Kenyatta's name while deploying police officers to break up meetings that he and Ford-Kenya leader Moses Wetang'ula plan. "Why are they using the President's name to harass and intimidate us? They are doing this because they have realised they don't have the support of the Luhya community,” he said, without naming any politicians. Kakamega Governor Wycliffe Oparanya and Devolution Cabinet Secretary Eugene Wamalwa have been holding meetings in Western. On Saturday, CS Wamalwa criticised the ANC and Ford-Kenya leaders, saying they will not become presidents if they keep “rotating in villages”. 2022 FOCUS Speaking at the home of Lugari MP Ayub Savula in Manyonyi village on Sunday, Mr Mudavadi also reiterated that his focus is to become Kenya’s next President. "Those asking me to state my position now know what my stand is. I'm going for nothing short of the presidency,” he said. Mr Mudavadi noted that he has served in key positions in government, including that of deputy prime minister. "I have been in the cold for 10 years now but I have decided to hold my ground and defend the right of every citizen,” he said. DEVELOPMENT On matters development, the politician asked Western region leaders to make use of their budgets instead of pleading with President Kenyatta for more projects. "They are busy going to the President to ask for development projects when they have budgets to implement. Let them implement the budgets and stop wasting time," he said. On the Building Bridges Initiative (BBI), Mr Mudavadi said: "We gave our views and are waiting for the steering committee to hand in its final report so that Kenyans can take a position on what is in the document." He was accompanied by Mr Wetang'ula, who is Bungoma County's senator, and MPs Titus Khamala (Lurambi), Kagesi Kivai (Vihiga), Christopher Aseka (Khwisero), Alfred Agoi (Sabatia) and Beatrice Adagala (Vihiga Woman Representative).