Kenya Airways will today be among several airlines that will be landing and taking off at the Jomo Kenyatta International Airport (JKIA) carrying passengers following the lifting of a ban on international flights due to the Covid-19 scourge. The move comes after the country on July 6 lifted a ban on inbound flights due to the health crisis, allowing airlines to fly inward effective today. Countries around the world have been gradually opening their airspaces to pave the way for resumption of global travel after flights were suspended due to restrictions aimed at curbing the spread of Covid-19. PRECAUTIONARY MEASURES According to several airlines’ schedules, passengers from Amsterdam, Doha and Paris will land on Monday and Wednesday as the three airlines – Air France, Qatar Airways and KLM resume flights. AirFrance and KLM also resume flights to Kenya today as the skies open for international travel. “We wish to assure all our customers that we have taken precautionary measures to ensure that we conduct our operations safely, comfortably and responsibly.  The safety of our passengers and crew will always be our top priority and this is why we have taken all necessary measures in accordance with WHO guidelines,” said Air France – KLM Commercial Director for Eastern Africa Steven Van Wijk. PASSENGER FLIGHTS KLM has scheduled four weekly passenger flights between Schiphol and Nairobi on Monday, Wednesday, Friday and Saturday flying the Boeing 787-10. Air France will resume flights from August 6, with one passenger flight per week from Charles de Gaulle Airport in Paris to Nairobi on Thursdays and returning to Paris on Friday. The airlines are advising passengers to familiarise themselves with travel restrictions that vary from country to country and may be subject to change prior to booking. “In particular, they need to be aware of the entry and residency rules for the destination countries as these are likely to have changed with the evolving global health situation,” said the statement from the carriers.