Covid-19 is likely to take several months or even years before the infections are controlled. Experts are far from completing phases 2 and 3 clinical trials before the vaccines are approved for use. Therefore, the illness is here to stay and as a country, we must find ways of coexisting with it. The cases in the country have risen steadily as our capacity to test increases. The effects that Covid-19 has had on the country’s health sector include increased mortalities from the disease and others like malaria, cholera and cancer due to change of priorities to focus on the virus and fear of seeking health services due to risk of contracting it. Covid-19 has also caused psychological stress to Kenyans due to fear and uncertainty. FACE MASKS Public health strategies have been implemented across the country, including hand-washing, wearing of face masks in public and physical distancing. The other mitigation measures like lock downs, closure of places of worship; businesses and schools and curfews have on the other hand caused untold suffering to Kenyans due to loss of income, separation of families and impaired access to quality healthcare for other existing ailments. These measures have also instilled fear and negative psychological effects on Kenyans. As a result the overall health of Kenyans is likely to deteriorate if the mitigation measures are sustained until the infection is fully controlled. Does this mean we should suddenly open up everything and return to normal? By all means no. We must, therefore, change our strategy to enable us cope and go back to our normal lives by carefully weighing our options and gradually easing the restrictions that are not having much impact now, like slowly opening up businesses while maintaining the public health measures like hand washing, wearing masks and physical distancing. Transport should be restored while continuing to observe the physical distancing by reducing the number of passengers in a vehicle and sanitising before boarding. We should also reopen schools after putting in place measures to ensure physical distancing. This could mean having more class rooms built, rescheduling lessons to half day shifts to allow few learners to be in school at any one time. ISOLATION BEDS We should also review our health system preparedness to see if we can cope with the likely increase in cases in the coming days. We need to ensure we have set up an adequate number of isolation beds, employed and trained adequate doctors and other health workers in all counties. The health workers also need to be fully equipped with enough personal protective equipment and holding facilities to stay when seeing patients to avoid spreading the infection from the isolation centres to their families and communities. Aside from this, specific motivation of these workers needs to be considered and implemented to avoid fatigue and demotivation. Lastly, since the level of preparedness for Covid-19 has been varied from county to county with unequal employment and distribution of health workers and PPEs, the country should put in place legislation for a Health Services Commission to regularise and strengthen the health system across all counties. Dr Korir is the National Treasurer, KMPDU.