I filed this article when rumours of a possible second lockdown were swirling in the country. The fear of another lockdown emanates from extraordinary meeting that has been arranged between President Uhuru Kenyatta and governors allegedly to discuss the possibility of a second lockdown following a spike in Covid-19 cases. Another issue of concern to many is the increase in sexual and gender-based violence (SGBV) cases during the lockdown. Women bore the brunt of the violence, we were informed in countless reports. The pandemic worsened SGBV due to many homes becoming pressure cookers of emotions. Higher poverty levels were laid bare as many more people already grappling with tough economic conditions found themselves worse off as businesses were shut to minimise the spread of the coronavirus. There are many other reasons given for the SGBV but they were not too dissimilar to those we already knew. The Cabinet secretary for Gender did her bit in engaging the media, telling us how concerned the government was about the matter, and regurgitated the numbers of those affected at every interview. What I have not yet heard is whether there are any plans to set up safe houses for women and children caught up in violence. REFUGE CENTRES The CS did acknowledge the efforts by charities that run a handful of refuge centres for women but the numbers are not enough to cater for the thousands of women in the country suffering violence. Such centres are crucial for those affected by violence to get shelter in safer places. Kenya has legislated on SGBV and the stakeholders are privy to what can be done on the legal front to protect women’s rights but it falls short on demanding establishment of refuge centres. That role nonetheless falls on the shoulders of the government. Women’s issues seem to occupy just a footnote of any government policy and it is proving detrimental to victims of domestic abuse. Lack of funds and crucial care packages are making the situation worse for SGBV victims. It is important that considerations are given in the budget that would enable counties to set up safe houses where women and children fleeing domestic abuse can be sheltered and from where they can rebuild their lives. ONE-STOP SHOP Women funds of all kinds have been set up but, in many cases, it is difficult for a SGBV victim or survivor to access them due to being homeless or too much bureaucracy in accessing the money. Refuge centres would ideally serve as one-stop shop from where women can be offered shelter and from where they can get psychological and financial support they desperately need.  An SGBV victim is our daughter, mother, sister, aunt, cousin and colleague. But we have, sadly, reduced the victims to statistics that we file in reports after long deliberations in the comfort of conference centres at beach resorts without caring that there are human beings behind those numbers. One in every three women is killed in domestic violence every week. The problem will continue. It is not a class, creed or religious but a human problem requiring humane solutions. There has been too much talk and meetings around the issue of SGBV and it is time the government in particular started to act and made sure its proposals of safety for women is realised on the ground through construction of safe houses in the counties. To that effect, there must be a ring-fenced budget allocation every year to set up refuge centres and other support structures for women and children fleeing domestic abuse. VIOLENCE It should be the responsibility of the counties with the support of the national government to ensure that women have somewhere safe they can run to from violence at home. The suggestion of keeping abused women at the police stations or hospitals is insensitive and demeaning. These are abused women in need of care. They are neither criminals nor suffering an abominable disease. Police stations and hospital environments can in fact exacerbate mental health problems for SGBV victims. Nurturing environment will help survivors of domestic and sexual violence to heal. Counties are much closer to the communities and should be able to liaise better with the police, hospitals, social workers and even nyumba kumi team to get women to safety. Safe houses would make it easier to coordinate emergency support. The emergency line set up recently is pointless if women contact it and at the end of it, all they get is advice on how to stay safe but not where they can go and be safer. How could one be safe in a home in which they experience violence? In any case, emergency lines may not be effective in all situations if women are unable to use a phone or even have access to one. It is time we stopped talking and acted by building refuge centres to help women survive violence. Ms Guyo is a legal researcher. kdiguyo@gmail.com @kdiguyo