Police in Siaya County are on the spot after it emerged that they have not taken any action on a primary school teacher alleged to have repeatedly defiled an 11-year-old Grade Four pupil in Sigomere a month ago. The girl’s father is mentally challenged and her mother quit the marriage and left behind four children, her relatives said. DEFILED At the centre of the saga is the suspect’s relative who is a civil servant and is said to have a hand in an alleged cover up. Medical records from Sigomere Sub-county Hospital where the girl was treated show that she was defiled. The victim's aunt reportedly caught the teacher in the act and reported the matter at Sigomere Police Station. The victim claimed that she was fetching firewood in a nearby bush when the suspect pinned her down and defiled her. He reportedly took off when the girl's aunt spotted him. "Although we formally reported the matter to police and immediately recorded statements, they are yet to arrest the suspect," said the dejected aunt. Speaking to the Nation on Tuesday the victim's aunt said police have not acted and the suspect remains at large. Reached for comment, Ugunja Sub-county head of criminal investigations Andrew Ochengo denied the cover up allegations. “My office took up the matter and detectives who were assigned the case have concluded investigations,” he said. “What remains is to arrest and arraign the suspect," he added. Mr Ochengo said the suspect had been traced to Musanda in Mumias West where he has been hiding. COMPROMISED "He has switched off his phone but we are still pursuing him. We have established that he has rented a house there and we are hopeful that soon he will be caught," he said. He denied claims that police handling the case had been compromised. Last month, Ugunja divisional police chief Ibrahim Muchuma made a similar promise to have the teacher apprehended. He had said police had obtained medical reports from the hospital. “The P3 form has been completed and the child, together with her aunt, have already recorded their statements with the police officer who is handling the case at Sigomere Police Station," he said on June 20. INVESTIGATIONS Mr Muchuma had indicated then that he had information that the suspect’s brother, who is an assistant county commissioner in Rift Valley, was allegedly trying to scuttle the investigations. "We are investigating the interference claims as well and if it is established to be true, then the officer will also be arrested and charged," Mr Muchuma had stated. Initially, the teacher had retreated to Homa Bay County but returned home upon realising that police were no longer interested in pursuing him. But the girl’s relatives said he is now back to the village and police cannot claim that he cannot be traced. “We see him all the time roaming around freely in the village," she said. Ugunja deputy county commissioner Daniel Nduti on Tuesday called on the police to move fast and arrest the suspect. "Whether one has a senior brother in government or not is not the issue. If investigations reveal he was culpable, then the law must be applied equally without fear or favour," he said.