The Principal of Chania Girls High School Monica Nduku Kimei was Wednesday arraigned in Thika for flouting procurement laws and forging documents to irregularly award a tender. The tender in question is worth Sh403,100 and was awarded to a Mr Robert Mwangi Njoroge to supply computers and computer accessories to the public secondary school. The Ethics and Anti-Corruption Corruption, who have been investigating the matter, said in court that Ms Kimei failed to issue a notice of termination to the bidders who had submitted bids for the supply of computer accessories. Ms Kimei is also accused of making a false document of a procurement meeting held on November 24, 2015 purporting to be the genuine minutes from the procurement committee that awarded the controversial tender. “Being the accounting officer  and principal  of the school with intent to influence the procurement process of purchase of computers and accessories, in the school made a false document  namely minutes of a  procurement  meeting purporting to be the genuine minutes  for the said procurement committee,” the charge sheet reads. Robert Mwangi Njoroge, who is said to have offered a bribe of Sh5,200 to Ms Monica Wangeci Maina, who is the school bursar, as a reward to facilitate the payment for the company that won the tender was also charged alongside the head teacher. Mr Njoroge is said to have committed the offence on May 14, 2016 in Kiambu County. Ms Maina was also charged with receiving a bribe contrary to Anti-Corruption and Economic Crimes Act of 2003. Mr Njoroge is also accused of also bribing Mr Shadrack Keli Mutinda, a computer studies teacher at Chania Girls High School, Sh5,000 to push for the payment after his company was awarded the tender Mr Mutinda is also said to have received an additional bribe of Sh3,100 from Mr Njoroge after the payment for the supply of computers was made. Ms Kimei, Mr Njoroge and Mr Mutinda denied the charges and were released on Sh200,000 cash bail each or an alternative bond of Sh300,000. Ms Maina was freed on Sh100,000 cash bail or a bond of Sh200,000 with a surety. The case will be mentioned on July 21 for further directions.