Nakuru County Assembly has rejected a petition by a resident urging the devolved unit to set aside Sh250 million for the construction of a care centre for the elderly. This comes as a big blow to Mr Edward Engasha Sabatia, a founder member of Gillian Sabatia Foundation’s efforts to set up an ultra-modern hospital dubbed Geriatric Hospital, Care Centre and Homes for the elderly in Nakuru. Had the assembly passed the petition, this would have been the first hospital of its kind for the elderly in the country. Mr Sabatia, in his petition to the assembly, said the foundation seeks to assist the elderly and vulnerable members of the society access physiotherapy and outpatient services among others services. He said the project estimated to cost Sh2 billion would be undertaken by the public private partnership. However,  House committee on Justice and Legal Affairs chairperson Erick Gichuki Kariuki, said Gillian Sabatia Foundation should have entered into Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with the county government of Nakuru before petitioning for funds for the project. “Pursuant to the Private Partnership Act No 15 of 2013, Gillian Sabatia Foundation should have entered into a Public Private Partnership nod,” read part of the committee report. The report further stated that Gillian Sabatia Foundation should have demonstrated this good intention by presenting a sound Financial Statement. “Gillian Sabatia Foundation biggest handicap is sound financial base to kick start the project to warrant any funding,” added the committee report. The report further stated: “Public resources cannot be used to fund non-existent projects which lacks clear Memorandum of Understanding by both contracting parties. Public resources can only be used where public will get value for money.” However, the committee observed that the county government of Nakuru should invest more in existing elderly homes by financing expansion and improvement of the facilities. “Nakuru County Government of Nakuru should request the Ministry of Devolution to supply food and other requirements to the county elderly homes,” added the committee final report. Nakuru Alms House in Manyani Estate is the only home foe the senior citizens in the county and is currently undergoing renovation to enable it accommodate more elderly persons.