Q: At first, I really enjoyed virtual meetings. I would prepare well in advance and be among the first people to log in. I would always be attentive until the very end. However, this has changed. It has been three months now and I dread attending online meetings and look for every excuse to stay away. I know it is just a matter of time before I get into trouble. How can I change this? You may be suffering from Zoom fatigue – a form of mental exhaustion, anxiety, or stress associated with online video conferencing. And just to be clear, this is not only applicable in zoom meetings. It can be experienced in all platforms that we use to host online video meetings. There is nothing wrong with you. You just tried a new thing, and it has now become routinely boring. However, you have every reason to worry because this is not only affecting your productivity at work, it is also impacting negatively on your personal, family, and social life. ONLINE MEETINGS We know for sure that online meetings require more attention especially when it comes to observing non-verbal meta-communication. We listen more keenly amid background noise especially when participants forget to mute their mics but interject enthusiastically with “aha’s and oh’s” that sometimes sound awful on the other end. Other times the calls drop and by the time you are back on, you’ve missed some key conversation and this may make you anxious. But there are things you and your employer could do to remain focused and productive. One, is to provide clear guidelines on how many meetings an employee can attend in a day, the duration of the meeting, and the dos and don’ts for the participants. Sharing information in advance is also useful because everyone will get a chance to prepare before the meeting. Where meetings are longer than two hours, allow a short break in between for participants to stretch and re-energise. Phone conference calls work effectively and provide a good alternative to video calls. You also need to cultivate a good work-life balance. You do not have to attend every other webinar or social catch-up you are invited to. Set a personal target on how much time you want to spend on online meetings, whether work or social, and adhere to it. Mwikali Muthiani - Managing Partner, MillennialHR @MwikaliN