Amani National Congress (ANC) leader Musalia Mudavadi is uncertain about his future, with top party officials pulling in different directions ahead of 2022 elections. Mr Mudavadi and Ford Kenya chief Moses Wetang’ula have been criss-crossing western Kenya to galvanise support, with both saying they will contest the presidency. ANC deputy party leader Ayub Savula told the Nation on Thursday that the party held a parliamentary group meeting on Wednesday “and resolved to fully support President Uhuru Kenyatta in and outside Parliament”. HALT ATTACKS The Lugari MP added that ANC agreed to halt attacks against Kakamega Governor Wycliffe Oparanya, Central Organisation of Trade Unions secretary-general Francis Atwoli and Devolution Cabinet Secretary Eugene Wamalwa. “We resolved that no party lawmaker will associate with Deputy President William Ruto and his brigade,” Mr Savula said. “Our focus will be to strengthen Mudavadi as the strongest presidential candidate in western to reach out to other communities in his State House journey.” Nambale MP Sakwa Bunyasi, who also chairs the Western Parliamentarians Caucus, said he took part in the meeting that was held at Panafric Hotel, Nairobi. “Musalia wants to become president and he should be free to hold discussions with other leaders. Uhuru, as Mt Kenya kingpin, must also be talked to,” Mr Sakwa said.  However, ANC secretary-general Barrack Muluka poured cold water on the resolutions, saying, he wasn’t aware of the meeting. “The ANC constitution says the secretary-general must be informed of any meeting of party organs. Minutes and the notice calling for the meeting must be filed with the SG,” Mr Muluka said. POLITICAL SUICIDE “Mudavadi is going all the way to the wire. Anything less will be political suicide. Anyone thinking of alliances with him and ANC should think deeply about that before making a move.” He added that ANC’s only partner is Ford Kenya. Mr Muluka denied reports that ANC is working with Mr Ruto even as Kakamega Senator Cleophas Malala and Nominated MP Godfrey Osotsi insisted that has been the case. “Show me your friends and I will tell you who you are. Mudavadi’s brigade of survivors has been dining and associating with Tangatanga MPs,” the senator said. Mumias East MP Benjamin Washiali and his Kimilili counterpart Didmus Barasa have joined Mr Mudavadi and Mr Wetang’ula’s teams for rallies in western Kenya. Working relationship “Savula has a court case and wants to survive by hiding in the government,” Mr Malala said. “There are only two formations in Kenya. You cannot work with the President if you are not working with [Orange Democratic Movement] leader Raila Odinga.” Mr Osotsi denied knowledge of the meeting. “I’ll not be surprised if such a meeting took place. I congratulate them if they made such decisions,” he said. Emuhaya MP Omboko Milemba also denied knowledge of the meeting. “I support a close working relationship with Uhuru and Raila because that is the system,” he said. Political analyst Beauttah Omanga said the ANC leader “has lost his bearing in politics”. 