Barely a week after the government reopened the airspace for domestic flights, the Tourism ministry has begun preparing for post-Covid-19 operations by asking industry players to re-engineer products and services to attract domestic tourists. The ministry wants industry players to offer affordable rates and services to attract domestic tourists following the collapse of the sector due to the coronavirus pandemic. “We have allocated Sh500 million for a post-Covid-19 campaign. When we are open, then we can sell. At the moment if we sell, it will be a disaster. What we are currently doing is to remain relevant as the safari destination. But after this crisis, and when the world is reopened, we can revamp our post-Covid-19 strategy that we are developing,” said Tourism Secretary Najib Balala. SH200 MILLION Speaking during a TV talk show, Mr Balala said the ministry would spend Sh200 million on public relations and Sh300 million on marketing campaigns. However, he decried inadequate tourism products and infrastructure to boost the industry. “People who are coming from the lockdowns will be desperate to travel to places where they can connect with nature. Kenya has an advantage and this will be our campaign. “In 2008, when I was appointed as the minister for Tourism, I structured the domestic tourism to be key and reinvested the money in its marketing,” said Mr Balala. The new traveller, he said, would check on the status of a destination’s hygiene before visiting. The minister urged hoteliers to put in place strict safety protocols to curb the spread of the virus at their facilities. He said despite the sector being on its knees due to the pandemic, Kenya has an edge due to its authentic, safari and wildlife-based nature. However, Mr Balala called for the diversification of Kenya’s tourism products to attract more tourists. “The Coast has been the biggest beneficiary of domestic tourism due to the affordable standard gauge railway charges. Tourists can also fly to the Coast or drive to the destinations. Maasai Mara, which is part of the safari packaging, is also interesting but not as strong because of the cost of flying into the areas is still very expensive,” he said. REGIONAL TOURISTS Mr Balala said post-Covid-19, the industry should target more regional tourists with affordable products for the sensitive domestic and regional tourism segment. “Not everybody wants to go to the beach or take a four to five-hour drive for a safari. We need to survey what the client wants. “This is the re-engineering of the tourism model. International travel will restart after discovery of a vaccine, which is in another 18 months,” he said. Mr Balala also pushed for investment in railway infrastructure to reach remote and untapped tourism destinations. He cited northern Kenya as a good tourism destination that lacks an efficient transport network. “At the moment you have to fly to Turkana, which is very expensive. The area cannot be developed, in terms of tourism, due to a lack of sustainable numbers,” he said. Mr Balala urged industry players to change tack in marketing, product development and to tap into digital tourism. He said Kenya is among African nations that are grappling with the challenge of international tourism that is sensitive to travel advisories and perception of insecurity.