An attempt by Nakuru County Assembly MCAs to pass a motion compelling the department of Education and Vocational Training to draw a formula of disbursing bursary to needy students has been suspended. The motion sponsored by Elburgon MCA Peter Njuguna seeks to  have bursary funds disbursed based on population of eligible beneficiaries in each of the 55 wards based on the latest population census. “Many students have deferred their academic programmes due to lack of funds and therefore the resources of the county should be shared equally,” said Mr Njuguna. He observed that bursary regulations that were passed last year were not adhered to. “Funds were distributed equally while many wards are more populated and this left out many deserving students,” said Mr Njuguna. Kiamaina MCA Wahome Jambo Kenya said the motion was timely and Education department should disburse bursaries fairly. “It’s only fair that education bursary is distributed to each ward according to population, this will ensure that all needy students realise their education dreams,” said Mr Wahome. Naivasha East MCA Stanley Karanja said the motion should push for amendments of the current bursary disbursement regulations. Tinet Ward Representative David Malel said a clause on equitable distribution of resources in the initial Bill that also included sports kitty was omitted and instead it was left to MCAs and members of public to decide during public participation. “A ward with highest population such as Kaptembwa is likely to spend more of its equitable share on bursary rather than development infrastructure,” said Mr Malel. Minority Leader Peter Wanjala Palanga (Olkaria) supported the motion but suggested that it should be incorporated in the existing regulations as anchored in the current regulations. “The bursary regulations need to be reviewed to fix the gaps that would make bursary funds benefit all the students,” said Mr Palanga. Mr Joel Karuri, the MCA for Biashara Ward in Naivasha, said the provisions guiding the bursary kitty need some amendments to ensure students benefit. Mr Maritim said bursary should not only be based on population but it should also include area and poverty index. Acting Speaker Philip Wanjohi (Lare) provoked Standing Order 95 on adjustment of the debate. “Listening to the MCAs nobody is against the motion, however, there are some concerns that need to be addressed before the debate continues and therefore this motion is postponed,” said Mr Wanjohi just before the House went on a 10 days recess on July 15. The House will resume on July 28.