Many of the devout in our country were pleased with the July 14 announcement that places of worship would be reopened. Closed since the outbreak of the pandemic, the time has come to slowly restore normal day-to-day activity in our country. The pilot for this plan to reopen places of worship have been Embu and Kirinyaga counties, which, based on an announcement by the Interfaith Council, would be reopening under strict limitations. President Kenyatta has in the course of the past few weeks unveiled measures to gradually reopen our economy from the Covid-19 related shutdowns. The phased reopening plan was announced by the President at the start of July. This includes lifting restrictions on those wishing to travel in and out of the capital and resuming air travel to and from countries that have managed to contain the virus. STRICT CONDITIONS There have also been indications that the strict conditions of the currently-in-place night curfew could be reconsidered, if the curve of the virus begins to flatten. According to the President, “Although the path to recovery is rocky and uneven, it is navigable”. The success of the current reopening plan is dependent on much more than government policy. It is, indeed, up to us, Kenyan citizens, to understand that we’re still in the midst of fighting a deadly pandemic, and that we must act accordingly. The reopening of our places of worship can serve as a model for how we must approach this reopening more generally. CENTRALITY OF FAITH The President understands the centrality of faith to navigating times of crisis. This led to places of worship being some of the first to reopen, albeit under strict limitations, meant to curb the spread of the virus, while allowing people to return to worshipping together. As such, faithful aged under 13 years, and above 58, will not be allowed in churches. This will stem the danger posed to these high-risk categories. Furthermore, services will be limited to 100 participants, all of whom will register in advance and ensure that they do not have symptoms of the virus. Face masks must be worn at all times and adequate social distancing observed. SAFETY MEASURES These safety measures are indeed those that the government has been reiterating all along. However, the fact that since churches reopening, people have proven their ability to uphold these shows that maintaining the quality of life that we are used to, despite our new Covid-19 reality, is possible. The government cannot be expected to police every part of the country at all times. What we need is people to take personal responsibility and follow the rules and regulations. This was not the case recently, when Gor Mahia FC fans turned out in droves to attend the funeral of the popular singer Lady Maureen in Migori County. Pictures from the funeral show clear signs of flouting social distancing rules, with people not even wearing face masks. Such behaviour, particularly in times of crisis, is completely unacceptable. RESPECTING REGULATIONS The fans acted in contrast with the way church-goers have been respecting the regulations and as a result, put us all at risk of infection. After all, funeral attendees, travelling from as far as Nairobi, later returned home and potentially moved the deadly virus around with them. Criticism has been levelled at the Government for implementing measures that are too draconian. However, the reopening of our places of worship has shown the Government’s flexibility and willingness to reconsider these, should citizens display their willingness to respect the measures that are in place for their own good. This requires all of us to make sacrifices and work together. Uhuru paraphrased this well when he said: “For us to revive the economy, reopen and remain open, the Government and all citizens must pull together.” We have, in the past, as a nation, navigated challenging scenarios. From outbreaks of ethnic violence, to political instability and challenges from Mother Nature, we have always overcome. Our success has been in our ability to see past differences and work together towards common interests. Our common interest during the current Covid-19 challenge is the gradual reopening of our country and restoration of life as we knew it. Let us learn from those faithful who have managed to see beyond the challenges, respected the regulations and returned to their places of worship. The power of their faith should be an inspiration to us all.  Mr Mugwang'a is a communications consultant. michael.mugwanga@gmail.com. @Mikeysoul