Those of you who saw Fiolina and I taking a walk last Saturday evening would never have thought that there were simmering differences between us. As you know, about a month ago, Fiolina and I started going for a walk once a week although she was only joining me out of fear that if she did not, I would be out there with Rumona. That is a lie. Rumona and I would not walk together. We would be running! The walk was important for me for two reasons. First, it enabled us to release the tension we had. Secondly, we were able to project the image that we have cultivated for a long time — that of a loving, model couple that everyone wanted to emulate. As we trod path after path, no one would have imagined that there was a reconciliation meeting scheduled for us the next day. The meeting was called after I wrote to her parents complaining how she was sabotaging my grand plans. My letter would have been ignored had I not used Caro, Mwisho wa Lami’s Minister for Communications, Broadcasting and Information, to spread the message in the village. MEALS PREPARED Come Sunday and Fiolina’s parents were the first to arrive at around noon. I was still walking around in a vest and shorts doing some cleaning. I rushed to the house when I saw them. As you know, one is supposed to limit their interaction with their in-laws. Fiolina had been so good to me in the last two days preceding that Sunday. My meals were specially prepared and served on time. My clothes washed and ironed. And that Sunday, she had not prepared mandazi, meaning that I had had a field day in the market. I was still thinking of how to keep my parents busy when Rasto arrived. At least they now had someone to talk to. Next to arrive was Tocla. The two kept Fiolina’s parents busy. My parents arrived later and shortly after, Apostle Elkana appeared. I had not invited him, but who would turn away a man of God? Electina and Honda were busy preparing food. I dressed up and went to join them. Fiolina must have been hovering around the corridors such that when I left the bedroom, she was there ready to walk with me to the sitting room. She was wearing a green long dress that matched with my Kaunda suit. So we emerged together in matching green attires, with Fiolina holding my hands, and smiling broadly. We portrayed an image of a couple in love and living in harmony. She was the first to speak, saying that as her husband and head of the house, I would speak last. BRINGING FOOD “My husband and I are very happy to host you for lunch,” she said, adding that she wished we could do this more often. As she spoke, Electina and Honda, together with Branton, started bringing food – chicken, rice, chapati, matumbo, brown ugali, assorted vegetables among others. She had outdone herself. “Thank you Electina and Honda for the food,” she said. “My husband and I are very happy and lucky to have these two polite and disciplined girls staying with us.”  She then asked me to speak. Clearly, I had been cornered. I thanked everyone for coming, particularly my parents-in-law, saying I was happy to see them. I did not know what else to say. Fiolina took over and said I usually have nothing much to say when I am overwhelmed with happiness.  Before inviting Elkana to pray for the meal, she said: “As you know, this food was prepared in a hurry so please forgive me if there are any failings.”  The Apostle made a long prayer in which he thanked God for the blessing of our marriage. “Other marriages out there are struggling, wives and husbands are separating, but this one is strong as a rock because it was founded in your name God.” We then settled to eat. Fiolina was overdoing herself that day. She did not allow me to stand and serve. Instead, she took a plate, served food and brought it to me. As she ate, she kept an eye on me and would bring me whatever I needed — salt, water or any extra serving. It was clear from everyone that we were deeply in love, and that I was always treated like a king. DONOR MONEY Even Rasto commented that I was very lucky. “I wish my son Kizito had found a girl like you,” he told Fiolina. “Nimo doesn’t even wash his clothes.” “I thank God for a good husband,” Fiolina said. “When you have a man who takes care of all your needs, and treats you well, is there anything you can’t do for him?” After lunch, there was small talk, which started with BBI then moved to Corona. The consensus was that there wa no Corona — that it was just a ploy by government to get donor money. “Wewe unajua mtu amekufa Corona?” Elkana asked. Next was tea and groundnuts. As we took them, Fiolina came with some envelopes and started distributing them. I had no idea what was inside. But she said it was a small token of appreciation from ‘my husband and I.’ “We would have done more but you know uchumi ni ngumu.”  After that, everyone thanked us for being a wonderful couple. Apostle Elkana prayed and they all left. There was no discussion about the differences that Fiolina and I had. Life went back to normal as soon as they left. I was not served supper that evening and the next day, we were back to competing selling mandazi. Every morning, I have been encountering Nyayo in the market, and he is obviously outselling me. “You can write another letter to my parents or invite them here, let us see who they will believe,” Fiolina said last week when I complained.