Police have arrested three suspects linked to violent robberies and rape incident at Langas in Eldoret, Uasin Gishu county. Kapseret Sub-county police boss Patrick Munyasi said officers from the Directorate of Criminal Investigations (DCI) traced the suspects to their hideout on Saturday after victims identified them and after analysis of CCTV footage. "These people have been connected to a series of robberies and burglaries. One of the gentlemen is alleged to have raped someone in the process of a robbery," he said, describing the arrest as a “major breakthrough”. "The woman in the rape case described the suspect as having a tattoo,” he said on Saturday, adding they would also look into M-Pesa transactions. JUSTICE The suspects are aged between 17 and 27 years and one is said to be a known criminal with four  pending robbery cases at a Kapsabet court. The three - a man and a husband and wife - reportedly used knives and machetes in their attacks. "The arrests will ensure justice for the victims. The cases are likely to reduce," the police boss said. This comes barely a week after multi-agency detectives arrested two terror suspects at Chepkatet village in Kapseret, Uasin Gishu. The suspects are in police custody amid investigations into the matter. MORE ATTACKS Since the start of the curfew to curb Covid-19 cases, Uasin Gishu county has registered a surge in criminal activities. Cases if drug dealing have also increased, with the perpetrators sneaking their products into the county through its porous borders. Eldoret businessman Stanley Migaine said he lost approximately Sh100,000 after thieves broke into his shop and stole cash and goods. "They took 14 crates of soda, scratch cards, Sh16,000 cash, a television and other items," he said. Residents of Huruma, Kiplombe and West Indies said break-ins have taken place despite police patrols. They said the criminals monitor police officers’ movements and strike in areas where patrols do not take place. “The criminals are playing hide and seek with police and breaking into residential houses and businesses,” said John Maina from Huruma. County police boss Johnston Ipara said patrols were intensified following the public’s complaints. "The people should not fear. We are here for them," he said.