The government’s decision to lease medical equipment may have been well-intentioned but it has continuously been dogged with controversy due to poor execution. Everything that could go wrong went wrong. Right from conception to implementation, the programme has stumbled at every stage. During the launch in 2015, the government announced that the programme would ensure that public hospitals in the 47 counties got the equipment they needed to provide quality healthcare. Although health services are devolved under the Constitution the counties do not have the capacity to manage them, which is a subject for debate. LEASE EQUIPMENT Specifically, however, when health functions were devolved, most of the counties did not have the facilities and equipment to offer the services. This is the basis for the intervention by the national government, which contracted some international firms to lease the equipment to counties. But then, as now, there were questions. One, had the national government conducted a needs assessment or consulted counties to determine what equipment they needed? Two, was that deal, then Sh38 billion but which rose to Sh63 billion, value for money? Three, were there viable options that could be pursued? The matter came up this week at the Senate, where former Attorney-General Githu Muigai was interrogated over it with questions being asked on whether the deal benefitted the citizens and if the right procedure was followed in securing it. Prof Muigai’s responses were puzzling, though not entirely surprising. In the first place, the Health ministry did follow due process, opting to sign off the contract without the AG’s advisory. As it transpires, the deal has not benefitted the public. Most of the equipment lies idle at the counties either due to lack of personnel to operate them or simply because they are not needed there. Two critical issues arise. First, the cost shot up nearly two-fold and, second, counties have been compelled to pay Sh200 million annually each to the vendors when the equipment are not being used. Here is a model case of double jeopardy: Public resources are committed to equipment that does not serve the people. It can be recalled that when the plan was mooted several governors raised objections, arguing that they did not need the equipment. But they were forced to take them. Things have since gone full circle. The government goofed and the public is the loser. The Senate must get to the bottom of the controversial programme and those who misled the government into the deal be made to account for their actions. Importantly, the government should look for a way out; the deal is not working.