Lands Cabinet Secretary Farida Karoney and National Land Commission (NLC) Chairman Gershon Otachi met on Thursday to defuse the tension that has been building between their agencies over the proposed Land Transactions (Electronic) Regulations, 2020. The ministry had sidestepped the commission in developing and publicising the proposed regulations, but then went ahead to say that the NLC had endorsed them, forcing Mr Otachi to write a protest letter to Ms Karoney. “I have learnt with dismay of the publication on page 24 of today’s (August 7, 2020) Daily Nation newspaper of a notice purported to be endorsed by the National Land Commission,” Mr Otachi said in his letter. “The task force that formulated the proposed regulations was not set up jointly or in consultation so as to derive any mandate to propose regulations on the commission’s behalf or by yourself and the National Land Commission,” he added. The proposed statutory instruments include the Land Registration (Electronic Transactions) Regulations, 2020; Survey (Electronic Cadastre Transactions), Regulations 2020; Stamp Duty (Amendment) Regulations, 2020; Stamp Duty (Valuation) Regulations, 2020; and Land (Amendment) Regulations, 2020. Others are Land (Extension and Renewal of Leases) (Amendment) Rules 2020; the Land (Allocation of Public Land) (Amendment, Regulations) 2020; and Physical and Land Use Planning (Electronic Development Control and Enforcement System) Regulations, 2020. The public was given 14 days to submit their views on the regulations, starting May 7. TEAM OVERSTEPPED The NLC maintains that it is not opposed to the proposed regulations because electronic land transactions is the way to go, but wants a consultative and collaborative process where the views of all key stakeholders are included. “The commission has no problem with electronic land transactions but we want to travel this journey together with the ministry as equal partners,” said Mr Otachi. The NLC’s reaction to the publication of the regulations appears to have stirred up the old wars between the ministry and the NLC, which characterised a large part of the inaugural commission’s life. During the Thursday meeting at Ms Karoney’s office at Ardhi House, they discussed the commission’s reservations expressed in Mr Otachi’s letter. The contentious issues include the mandate of the task force that came up with the regulations. The NLC holds that the task force went beyond its terms of reference to propose wholesome amendments to existing regulations without consulting key partners in the management of land in the country. The NLC has also taken issue with its exclusion from development of the regulations, and its name being used in the ministry’s public notice. “We wish to make it clear that the National Land Commission dissociates itself from the said advert as crafted and strongly protests the improper use of its name in the said advertisement,” Mr Otachi said in his letter. REPORT REVIEW To cool things down, the task force was instructed to meet the commission on Friday to take it through the proposed regulations and its report. But the meeting was postponed to allow the commission to go through the task force’s recommendations. “It was felt the meeting with the task force would not be necessary until the NLC has had adequate time to look at the task force’s report and the proposed regulations,” an officer at the commission said. Ms Karoney did not respond to the Saturday Nation’s questions on the tension between her ministry and the commission. The NLC’s position is that there is no problem amending the regulations, but the task force needed to point out specific areas that, if not amended, would hinder electronic transactions. The regulations, if adopted as they are, will establish a digital National Land Information System to provide an efficient and effective land administration system and to improve ease of doing business by cutting property registration time. They will to establish an electronic payment system to improve revenue collection, reduce paper work and improve storage.  