At least five nominated senators who snubbed Monday’s Jubilee parliamentary group meeting at State House in Nairobi could lose their positions. This is after the party kicked off the process of their expulsion. Jubilee secretary-general Raphael Tuju yesterday disclosed that the party had recommended to its disciplinary committee that the five — Millicent Omanga, Iman Falhada Dekow, Waqo Naomi Jillo, Victor Prengei and Mary Yiane Seneta — be removed. DISCIPLINARY ACTION “If they have any illusions that we will make the mistakes made by ODM and ANC with respect to unsuccessful expulsion of some of their members, we have learnt our lesson and are going to follow due process,” he said, adding that the party is determined to ensure that the five are kicked out. He said it was wrong for the senators to snub their party leader’s meeting and they must now be prepared to face the disciplinary committee. Mr Tuju also stated that the party had confirmed from mobile telephone service providers that all the invitations were delivered to the Jubilee senators. By last evening, Senate Chief Whip Irungu Kang’ata (Murang’a) had dispatched the letters to the five senators. Jubilee vice-chairman David Murathe said that Article 13 of the party’s constitution is clear on the disciplinary procedure against “a member of the National Assembly or Senate who without justification opposes party positions and policy in Parliament”. However, Senator Christine Zawadi was spared after she wrote a letter to Mr Kang’ata apologising for skipping the meeting. “I did not attend the Jubilee PG meeting at State House … because of … barriers that have been erected by the government to contain the spread of Covid-19,” Ms Zawadi says in the letter seen by the Nation. Nandi Senator Samson Cherargei said the senators were being targeted because of their support for the DP. “It is evident the country is being ruled by fiat. The highest office in the land is one of the biggest instigators of impunity and lawlessness in the country,” he said. Kirinyaga Governor Anne Waiguru welcomed the decision, arguing that “party discipline is paramount”. The nominated senators, she said, have no mandate other than serving as representatives of the party. “Once they can no longer pursue the party’s agenda, they should respectfully quit,” she said. Nyeri Town MP Wambugu Ngunjiri said party rebels have taken advantage of the fact that there is no punishment for misbehaviour to push their agenda of premature campaigns and undermine the party. “They have opposed the Handshake, BBI, the fight against corruption, and calls to stop premature politics. They have fought and badmouthed party officials without basis. The party must take action and we support this initiative,” he said. Cherangany MP Joshua Kutuny said the Senate nominees “must know we have able men and women who are ready to fill those positions”. “Even defiant members like Kipchumba Murkomen and Susan Kihika should be deregistered from the party list if they continue defying the party position. Let them go and seek fresh mandates,” he said.  