As concerns increase over rising violations of anti-doping regulations, Kenyan athletes will now face more intense scrutiny before competing in Sweden. This is after the Swedish Athletics Association on Monday said they are sharpening rules for athletes who train in countries where out-of-competition tests are not quite advanced, with Kenya and Ethiopia classified in this category. According to EME News, an independent track and field information agency, quoting Swedish public broadcaster SVT, Swedish Athletics Association secretary general Stefan Olsson has expressed concerns over the capacity of anti-doping testing in Kenya and Ethiopia. DETAILS ABOUT ATHLETES “There is no prohibition on going there, but if they do, we should really have knowledge of where the athletes are, how long they should be there, with what training group, coach and manager they train with,” Olsson said. “It may be that we contact Swedish anti-doping so that they can add extra resources before, during and after these trips,” he added. Kenyans and Ethiopians have always featured prominently in athletics competitions in Sweden, both in road racing and in track and field. Athletes from Kenya have been regular winners at the annual BAHAUS-galan Diamond League meeting in Stockholm whose new 2020 date was on Tuesday set for August 23 after changes in the global track and field calendar by World Athletics. KENYANS WON At last year’s meeting, Rhonex Kipruto and Timothy Cheruiyot triumphed in the 10,000 and 1,500 metres races, respectively, with Agnes Jebet Tirop winning the 5,000 metres in a race that also featured eight Kenyans, including two-time world 5,000m champion Hellen Obiri. Ethiopian and Kenyan athletes have won 13 titles out of the 20 on offer in the men’s and women’s divisions of the annual Stockholm marathon. Sweden’s Isabella Andersson has won a record seven of the last 12 women’s titles at the Stockholm Marathon. Formerly known as Isabella Moraa Amoro, Isabella changed nationalities from Kenyan to Swedish in 2009 after wedding Swede athlete Lars Andersson in October, 2006.  