Before the Covid-19 crisis struck, Nakuru’s Afraha Stadium was looking forward to a massive rehabilitation that would transform the facility into a modern venue. The biggest wish of the enthusiastic sports fans in Nakuru County was to see the stadium, located along Moi Road, get a new kiss of life. And it was all system go with the 60-year-old stadium headed for a Sh4billion renovation and the ground-breaking earmarked for last month. The mandatory paperwork and architectural designs of the venue were as good as done and dusted. But the rehabilitation was dealt a big blow a month before the ground-breaking when the deadly coronavirus pandemic hit the country, halting all the sporting activities including works at the stadium. “The drawings and design works were progressing well and we were within the timelines before all hell broke and disrupted our plans. “It now means the work will be delayed until the coronavirus pandemic is contained,” said a county official, who asked not be named as he is not the county spokesperson. Nakuru County Governor Lee Kinyanjui led his administration in relocating traders from the main Wakulima Market to Afraha Stadium Annex in a bid to observe the social distancing regulations. Today, if you are visiting Afraha Stadium for the first time, you will be forgiven to think it’s a godown as it has been reduced to a store for second hand clothes by dealers who operate outside the stadium. Not even the logo of Kenya Premier League side Ulinzi Stars, who use the ground for their home matches is spared as it is hardly visible, blocked by noisy and smoking tuk tuks, an army of boda boda operators and a heap of fresh produce along with rotting litter scattered at the parking bay. The pathways leading to the stadium have been occupied by small scale traders while the perimeter wall has been converted into makeshift eateries. The outside of the stadium is in total chaos and is a health hazard in waiting as traders have converted the perimeter wall into a urinal and are reliving themselves in the open. The inside of the stadium is not better either, as the main stand is caving in under the heavy weight of a heap of second hand clothes and other assorted merchandise. One of the stands in the Russia side has been vandalised and iron sheet stolen while another, whose roof was earlier ripped off by strong winds, has never been repaired since last year. The heavy rains pounding the area have exposed the decaying drainage system that rings the pitch as it is blocked with muddy waters having slowed the intended flow into the main drainage system of the stadium. The stadium workers are trying to level the bumpy pitch with a heavy metal roller to make it smooth for players who have described it as a “nightmare” during league matches. According to the County Minister for Sports, Culture and Social Service Lucy Kariuki, all activities to renovate the stadium have been put on hold due to the outbreak of the pandemic.“We have halted all the activities pertaining to rehabilitation of the stadium as the area around the stadium has been occupied by traders,” said Kariuki. Previously the designing of the stadium was being undertaken by the department of infrastructure. SMOOTH TRANSITION However, due to the magnitude of the project, the county has sought the services of a consultant to ensure a smooth transition. “The county government has engaged a consultant with massive experience due to the magnitude of the project and also our local designers at Public Works are overwhelmed by the internal county development projects,” added Kariuki. “The consultant has already hit the ground and has started work. We have already given him the concept of the kind of the facility we want.” She did not indicate the next ground-breaking day but she was optimistic it will not be in a far distance. “Soon we shall commission the work once the covid-19 pandemic is contained and we are hopefully things will be okay,” she added. MAKESHIFT OPEN MARKET Football Kenya Federation (FKF) Nakuru sub-branch secretary Eliakim Mbalilwa urged the devolved unit to speed up the repair of the Afraha Stadium. “The stadium apart from being the home ground of Ulinzi Stars is crucial to the development of football in Nakuru as the pitch is also used by teams in National Super League,” said Mbalilwa. Also affected by the crisis is Afraha Stadium Annex which has been converted into a makeshift open air market as coronavirus pandemic take toll on sports facilities in Nakuru County. A diehard fan of Ulinzi Stars, Maxwell Owino, said the virus is a big setback to the planned renovation of the facility. “This crisis s a big lesson to the county government not to rely on one stadium,” said Owino.