A corruption court has ruled that Busia Governor Sospeter Ojaamong and eight others facing a Sh8 million graft case have a case to answer. The decision shocked the accused, with their defence lawyer saying, “We were hoping that we will walk away free today but we are shocked the suspects have been put on their defence.” But Chief Magistrate Douglas Ogoti responded, “Its always like that as suspects hope to walk away free.” And immediately after Mr Ogoti ruled that the governor has a case to answer, Mr Ojaamong stated, “I will give a sworn defence. I will also be calling several witnesses to assert my innocence.” Besides Mr Ojaamong, all the other accused stated they will also give sworn testimonies “to prove they are not guilty as charged”. As the accused chorused that they will lead sworn defences, Mr Ogoti interjected by asking them, “Do you understand what you mean when you say you will tender sworn testimony?” He explained, “Giving a sworn evidence means that you will be cross-examined by State prosecutors on what you testify about the case.” The defence lawyers asked the court to allow them to consult with the accused on the number of witnesses they will call. Mr Ogoti directed the case to be mentioned on June 12 for directions. In his ruling, the magistrate said, “Having considered all the evidence tendered by the prosecution, I find that a prima facie case has been established against all the accused. They will be put on their defence.” In the case, Mr Ojaamong had denied abuse-of-office charges. He was also accused of conspiracy to commit an economic crime and engaging in a project without proper planning. He was charged at the Milimani Law Courts alongside County Executive Committee member Bernard Yaite, Finance Chief Officer Allan Ekweny and treasury head Samuel Ombui. Mr Ojaamong is being defended by Senior Counsel James Orengo and Mr Stephen Ligunya. Testimony made in court was that the Busia governor and the other officials engaged a company known as Madam R Enterprises to conduct a feasibility study on waste management yet the project had not been budgeted for. In the process, the county lost Sh8 million, the court was told. They were also accused of wilful failure to comply with the law on the management of public funds and fraudulent acquisition of public property. Others accused in the case are Mr Timon Otieno, Mr Leonard Wanda, Madam R Enterprises and its directors Ms Edna Adhiambo, Ms Renish Achieng and Sebastian Hallensleben, a German national.