Gor Mahia prolific talisman Nicholas Kipkirui has assured K'Ogalo fans that he is going nowhere as a mass exodus of players looms at the club. Kipkirui, who revealed that he has got offers from a number of clubs, says that his allegiance is with the club and he plans to see out his contract which ends in June 2021. The former Zoo Kericho attacker, who revealed that being broke has forced him to relocate from Nairobi to his home in Kericho County, says Gor was there for him during his long spell with injury and the best way of paying back is to stick with the Kenyan Premier League champions through happier and sad times. "I'm not going anywhere soon. Yes, I know many will leave at the end of the season because of the tough financial conditions at the club, but I am determined to finish my contract and renegotiate with the club," he said. Since the exit of their shirt sponsor, Sportpesa in August year, K'Ogalo has found it hard to pay salaries and currently owes players pay for several months. The 23-year-old, however said his main focus is regaining top form so that he can lead K'Ogalo to clinch both the domestic and continental titles next season. "I just want to get back to top form and I believe I can achieve that since the injury I had at the start of this season was a great setback and affected my performance," he added. The versatile attacker who has been a regular starter at K'Ogalo revealed that he is now training with some of the local clubs in Kericho so as to keep fit. "I have been following the training schedule given to us by our coach and also trains with local clubs here. There is a lot of talents in Kericho which needs to be tapped," he said. The highly rated striker joined Gor in November 2018 from Zoo Kericho, where he is remembered for scoring 14 league goals for the then  newly promoted KPL side. Despite inconsistent performances this season, Kipkurui has managed to be Polack's first choice striker, relegating Ugandan import Juma Balinya to the bench. Other strikers Gor boasts of in their squad are Boniface Omondi, Kennedy Agogo, former Kibera Black Stars striker, Nicholas Omondi and former Migori Youth forward, Clinton Okoth. Kipkirui, the 2018 Sports Journalists Association of Kenya (SJAK) Young Player of the Year Award winner, has bagged four league goals this season.