According to a study by the National Agency for the Campaign against Drug Abuse (Nacada), 18 per cent of the 10-14-year-olds interviewed had consumed alcohol at least once while 13 per cent used drugs and substances like cigarettes. Close to 40 per cent of adults aged 15-65 years have used an alcoholic beverage with variations in the types and rate of consumption across regions, rural-urban residence, age, gender, education level, religion and economic status. The rate of drug abuse is alarming worldwide. By 2010, five per cent of adults (230 million) had used illicit drugs and the number is increasing. With 119-224 million users, bhang was the most popular drug. The market for heroin in Kenya increased from 8.5-35 kilogrammes in 2010 as evidenced by more seizures. There are also locally brewed alcoholic beverages — such as chang’aa and busaa. It is worse during the Covid-19 pandemic owing to the government’s restrictions on social gathering. Since people cannot go to bars, they resort to massive brewing and secret consumption. ADDICTION The high consumption of drugs and substances among 15-64-year-old adversely affects the economy and society, including by increasing the spread of HIV infections and STIs. It is even worse where injection of narcotics is involved. National Aids Control Council (NACC) data show 26,000 youth in Coast inject drugs, with one in every four infected with HIV. Nairobi has 2,000 injecting youths. The practice is responsible for four per cent of HIV infections, whereby Coast has 17 per cent of the cases. The situation is dire in learning institutions since many students have become drug addicts. Many societies pay a high price for drugs in economic and in human terms. They lose productive citizens and acquire a crippling social burden. The government spends a lot on treatment, which impedes service delivery to the citizenry. It’s not easy to drop drug addiction, as it requires several steps for complete withdrawal.Counselling is important, especially for long-term addicts. To achieve a proper guidance and counselling regime, the centres should be staffed only with skilled counsellors. THERAPY It is important to allow drug addicts to give their own answers. For example, ask them “How comfortably do you want to reduce your daily consumption?” rather than “Will you be fine with twice from thrice daily consumption?” Counselling is not about disciplining or intimidating addicts but rather action taking and termination. Empathising with their client prevents the latter from exploring their own issues and, hence, feeling inferior. Counselling is also not a matter of influencing attitude or behaviour by persuading or convincing. Thus, a counsellor should give direction on how to achieve complete withdrawal. Proper counselling could help to reduce the increasing numbers of drug addicts in the country. LILLIAN OWAGA, Kericho