Lawyers and human rights activists want three police officers who were recently filmed assaulting a suspect in Nakuru punished. In the video clip that was circulated on social media, two police officers are seen harassing the suspect and another repeatedly pulling the man’s genitals in an attempt to force him to board a police vehicle. The Law Society of Kenya wants the three officers, who include a corporal at the Nakuru Central Police Station, to face the law over the act which they termed as 'heinous'. In a letter addressed to the Inspector General of Police, Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions (ODPP) and the Independent Policing Oversight Authority (Ipoa), LSK President Nelson Havi wants the officers interdicted and prosecuted over sexual harassment. "The LSK demands for immediate disciplinary action including interdiction and prosecution of the police officer involved in the incident. The brutal force used on the suspect was not only unreasonable but was out-rightly degrading and inhuman treatment. The act is unacceptable, unlawful and heinous," said Mr Havi. On Saturday, LSK said it had obtained the identity of one of the police officers who was allegedly captured pulling the suspect's genitals. The lawyers' body wants action against the officers  within seven days. LSK also wants the suspect, who has since gone into hiding for fear of his life, be protected from any harm. "The victim has gone underground fearing for his life. He should be protected from possible harm from the three police officers or their agents," said Mr Havi. The director of Nakuru Central Police Station David Kuria and his People's Power Watch counterpart Jesse Karanja have also demanded urgent investigations and prosecution of the police officer. "Our attention has been drawn  into the assault of a vendor by police officers who attempted to pull the genitals or the suspect as they forced him into a police vehicle. “We want the IG and the ODPP to swiftly intervene to have the officers punished for the act," said Mr Kuria. A witness told the Nation that the Nakuru man was being assaulted by the three policemen for failing to wear a mask in public.