Police in Siaya are investigating claims by a local banker that his life is in danger after he allegedly received threatening phone calls from a politician. The complainant, Kevin Ajinja, made a report at Akala Police Station under OB number 20/26/5/2020 claiming former Gem MP Jakoyo Midiwo threatened his life on Tuesday. "He said I will pay for dragging his name and associating him with a group of youth who unleashed terror on perceived opponents of the former MP," Mr Ajinja said in the police report. Police are also investigating claims that the threat is linked to another attack on the banker's family by people allegedly associated with Mr Midiwo. On Monday night, unknown people attacked Mr Ajinja’s family at their Ndiru home. They lit fire in the compound and broke window panes. Following the attack, Tobias Ajinja, the banker's father, filed a report at the same police station under OB number 11/26/05/2020. Neighbors repulsed the attackers, one of whom locals claimed is a staunch supporter of the former MP. The Monday attack happened a few hours after Gem MP Elisha Odhiambo met a group of miners at the same home. "I visited the home on Monday and held a meeting with the miners, but the agenda was not political," MP Odhiambo said. During the meeting, the gold miners requested the MP to help them get back their equipment which were seized by police on April 8. Mr Ajinja said he believes his family was attacked because of the MP’s visit. "My family was attacked because of the MP's visit and we believe it was politically instigated by the opponent of the legislator, " Mr Ajinja said. Siaya police boss Francis Kooli said police are investigating the two incidents. "If you speak to both the current and former MP, you will realise that the conflicts border on political supremacy battles but as law enforcement agencies we will stick to our mandate of enforcing law and order at all times," Mr Kooli said Mr Jakoyo did not respond to a message seeking his comment. But in an interview with a local radio station, Mr Jakoyo said he made a call to the banker as claimed but his intention was to ask him to stop dragging his name into criminal accusations in the constituency. He also distanced himself from the controversial youth group.